1. Extermination

The kitchen floor trembled. I placed a glass of Kaza No. 3 whisky on the sideboard and observed how the liquid reacted to the passing of the subway train. It rose briefly up the side of the glass before cascading down to form a circular wave that collapsed in on itself only to blossom out again. As the rumbling beneath my feet intensified, all semblance of order in the glass vanished, leading to a very real danger of spillage. I had no option but to empty the glass down my throat.
Man, it was rough. Rough but friendly in a playful bulldog kind of way.
The train passed. Calm returned. I refreshed my glass and started thinking about breakfast.
A high window gave me a worm’s eye view of the pavement running past my basement flat. A tuk-tuk spluttered by, its misfiring 2-stroke engine putting me in mind of a 60-a-day smoker.
The phone rang. I grabbed the handset. ‘Seth Norton.’
‘There’s been another one.’ The voice was gravel on sandpaper.
‘A murder?’
‘Nah. A bring and buy sale in aid of the local orphans. Of course a murder. Apartment 23, Montgolfier House, Rue Morgue. Get your arse over there as quick as you like.’
As quick as I liked wasn’t as quick as the Chief had in mind, but that was his look out. For one thing, I wasn’t due back on duty for the best part of an hour. For another, I had no desire to examine a stiff on an empty stomach.
My frying pan was in the sink, a plateau crowning a mound of crockery and cutlery. Several flies and a smattering of bugs were held captive in a layer of congealed fat. Most were dead; the rest must have wished they were.
I checked the fridge. There was bacon, there were sausages. I had eggs and a half-full tin of baked beans. It was the makings of a decent breakfast.
The phone rang again. I took the bacon and the sausages and dumped them on the table. Then I back-heeled the fridge door and reached for the phone. ‘Seth Norton.’
‘You still there, Norton?’
‘No, Chief. I left two minutes ago.’

Compared to my hovel, Apartment 23, Montgolfier House was a palace. Compared to anywhere else, it was a hovel.
The late Citizen Anton Delgado lay face down on the living room carpet. He was wearing a pair of long johns and a stunned expression. Bits of the back of his head weren’t where they should be. They were mostly on the carpet, though a few scraps clung to congealed blood on the poker that had apparently done for him.
‘They remind me of mah-jongg tiles,’ said Citizen Gene Hooke, the police photographer. Careful not to disturb anything, he knelt beside the corpse to get a close up of the fatal wound. He took out his hanky and gingerly removed the spent flash bulb. Then he put bulb and hanky into his pocket before producing a fresh bulb which he fitted into the camera. ‘You ever play mah-jongg, Inspector?’
‘Not really my sort of game.’
‘I’d have thought it right up your street. You being so cerebral and all that.’
Citizen Gert Wyman overheard and barked a disdainful hah!. ‘Cerebral, my arse. Loves to put on airs and graces, does our Detective Inspector Norton, but he doesn’t fool me. I doubt he can even read.’
‘I can read you,’ I told him. ‘You fat toad.’
It was an apt description. If I ever came across anything more toad-like than Wyman, I‘d know for sure it was a toad.
He started the long, agonising business of removing his bulk from the armchair he was lounging in, then thought better of it. He didn’t so much sit back down as drop like a sack in a laundry chute. ‘Six murders,’ he goaded. ‘Six murders and you haven’t a clue about who’s doing them.’
‘Seven.’
‘This one doesn’t count. Whoever did this is a Johnny-Come-Lately - not the West Side Ripper. I’d have thought even a dunderhead like you could have figured that out.’
‘A murder’s a murder. And the Ripper’s a suspect until I decide otherwise.’
‘Come off it, Norton. All the Ripper’s victims have been women. They’ve all come from the West Side and they’ve all been poisoned before having their internal organs harvested. Chummy here – in case you hadn’t noticed - is clearly not a woman. He shows no sign of having been poisoned. and his innards are where his innards should be. Throw in the fact we’re nowhere near the West Side and one can reasonably conclude there’s a new killer in town.’
‘Conclude what you like, Wyman. I’ll wait until I’ve a few more facts.’ I looked again at the hole in Delgado’s skull. ‘Would I be right in saying the poker was driven into the victim’s head?’
‘With great force. Whoever did this is built like an ox – which clearly the West Side Ripper isn’t.’
‘Who says he isn’t?’
‘I says he isn’t. The sort of person who can remove internal organs with the precision of a skilled surgeon is not the sort who can conjure up enough brute force to drive a poker through someone’s skull. Trust me: this is not the work of the Ripper.’
I’d seen enough of the body and heard enough of Wyman. ‘I’m done here. When can I expect the pathology report?’
‘When I’m good and ready to let you have it.’ Wyman heaved himself out of the chair – this time for real. The sweat stains under the armpits of his white jacket were wider and damper than usual, which prompted me to look up at the ceiling fan. It wasn’t moving.
‘What’s up with the fan?’ I asked.
Gene took another photograph of the corpse before answering. ‘Nothing. I turned it off.’
‘Now why would you do a thing like that?’
‘I wanted to see old fatso sweat.’
Wyman’s face reddened. It looked like a tomato coated with morning dew. He swatted a switch on the wall. ‘If you ever end up in my morgue, they’re going to bury you with your brains up your arse. You little pipsqueak!’
The ceiling fan went to work rendering the turgid air more breathable.
‘You got all the photos you need?’ I asked Gene.
‘Not yet, Inspector. You’re going to have to turn the body over so I can get him full frontal, as it were.’
I make it a point to touch neither the dead nor the dying, so I motioned at the uniformed constable standing by the door. ‘Time for your good turn for the day.’
The constable paled. ‘Me, Inspector? But I’m not trained for that sort of thing.’
‘Nobody is, son. Now if you don’t mind...’
Giving me a look that could have curdled milk, the constable did as he was told before trotting off to the bathroom to empty his stomach.
The front of Anton Delgado’s body was in better shape than the back. He was early fifties, slightly paunchy, cursed with a face like a gargoyle and most definitely dead.
‘Right, I think I’ve seen enough.’ I pointed to a door. ‘Is that the study you were telling me about?’
‘No,’ said Gene. ‘That’s the bedroom.’
‘Where, if you remember,’ said Wyman, ‘a certain young lady is waiting to be questioned.’
‘She can wait,’ I said. ‘I want to see the study.’

It wasn’t my idea of a study. To me it looked like a workshop that happened to have a desk, a swivel chair and a book shelf. It also contained metal shelving packed with tools and machine parts, some of which looked familiar, some of which didn’t.
Sergeant Studebaker had made himself at home in the swivel chair. He produced a rasping sound as he scratched his bristled chin. Square-jawed, swarthy, and forever looking like he was up to something, he was the sort you might not trust with your girlfriend but would be glad to have on your side if it came to fisticuffs. The first time I saw him, I knew he had to be a police sergeant. He was too much the type to be anything else.
 ‘This guy,’ he declared, ‘was an A1 nutter. If he weren’t dead, I’d have him sent off to the funny farm. I mean, take a look at this, will ya?’
From the desk he picked up a pocket watch and tossed it to me. With the slightest of fumbles, I managed to catch it.
 It was a half hunter, which meant a glass panel on the outer lid did away with the need to open the case to tell the time. I had one like it, except the numbers on mine stopped at ten the way any sensible watch would.
This one went up to twelve.
‘Twelve!’ said Studebaker, in case I’d missed it. ‘What the fuck is that all about? And this?’ He held up a ruler. ‘You see, boss? As well as centimeters, it’s divided into something called inches – 12 in all. It’s like this guy had a fetish for the number 12.’
The desk was littered with tiny tools – the sort you’d expect to see in a jeweler’s shop. There was also a soldering iron, an angle-poise lamp and a large magnifying glass.
I showed Studebaker the ID card I’d taken from Anton Delgado’s jacket. ‘He is – or was – an engineer. Seems his work was also his hobby.’
‘Take a shufti at the back of that watch,’ Studebaker suggested ‘See if it doesn’t give you goose bumps.’
There was an inscription running around the edge of the watch. I had to use the magnifying glass on the desk to make out what it said. ‘TAG Heuer. Switzerland.’ I could only shrug. ‘It’s a bit cryptic but hardly the stuff of which goose bumps are made.’
Studebaker took off his wrist watch and showed me its back. ‘You see that inscription? K-Temp. North Side. K-Temp being the manufacturer. North Side being where the K-Temp factory’s located.’
‘So you think this was made by an outfit called TAG Heuer in some place called Switzerland?’
‘Yeah, and neither of these things exist hereabouts. Now do you have goose bumps?’
‘Not quite. But I’m getting there.’ If Studebaker was right, the watch must have come from Elsewhere. But then how had it ended up in Kaza-Blank? ‘What about the ruler? Any indication as to where it was made?’
Studebaker put his watch back on. ‘You know, I didn’t think to look.’ He picked up the ruler and examined the side with the markings. When that revealed nothing, he turned it over. ‘And there we have it. Made in Hong Kong. I ain’t never heard of Hong Kong and I’d be willing to bet you ain’t neither.’
‘OK, Sergeant. I now officially have goose bumps. You’d better bag the watch and ruler and see if you can find anything else that’s out of place. While you’re doing that, I’ll have a chat with our witness.’

The witness was in the bedroom, perched on the bed, blue jacket nestling on her shoulders, a uniformed constable in the chair beside her. 
The first thing I noticed was how frail she seemed, how vulnerable. Like a sparrow I thought, remembering the time I'd held one in my hand and realised how easy it would be to crush the life out of it. What struck me next was that she had a killer body, eyes blazing with mischief and an elfin face.
The constable handed me the girl’s identity card. Her photograph showed her with long blond hair and not the short black crop she now sported. Her name was Citizen Cora Maxwell. Age: 29. Height: 172 centimeters. Date of Arrival in Kaza-Blanka: 23 Brumaire, Year 82. Occupation: Artist.
It didn’t take a detective to work out the situation. Beautiful girl. Ugly man. What could bring them together in a shithole like this?
‘So how much was he paying you? And what was he paying you for?’
The constable reacted like I’d slapped him. He did a funny twitch thing with his head then gave me a look that said, ‘Sir! You’ve gone too far.’
Citizen Maxwell treated me to a cold, dead smile that amounted to an invitation for me to go roger myself. ‘Two hundred assignats, whoever you are. As to what that was in exchange for – that’s between me and him.’
‘I’m Detective Inspector Seth Norton. There are two things you should know about me. One is that I’m bloody good at my job; the other is I’m a complete arsehole.’
‘I’d worked out the other for myself.’
‘It pays to advertise.’
‘So, Inspector Arsehole, ask your dumb questions, then fuck off.’
I was starting to like her. ‘What happened here?’
‘What do you think happened here?’
‘We’ll get through this bollocks a lot quicker if only one of us asks questions.’
‘If you don’t mind me saying so, you look like a dirty old man.’
She was referring to my beloved raincoat, which admittedly had seen better days, but had served me well throughout my policing career. I liked her a little less now. ‘I do mind you saying so. Now let’s have your story before I lose patience and put you under arrest.’
‘Mostly it’s the same story as every night. I was on Rue Dante looking for business. Some John picks me up and brings me back to this dump. We talk for a bit, then I suggest we hurry things along. Sure, sure, says the John. But let’s have a drink of sherry first. So I force myself to neck a glass of Kaza Dry No. 2, which is something I intend to never do again. I’ve had cough medicine that tastes better.
‘Anyway, the John takes off his clothes – all except his freaky underwear – and I think we’re finally going to get down to business. Instead of which he asks me if I want to know his name, and I say no I don’t. But he tells me anyway.’
She paused, waiting for me to ask the obvious. There was clearly something of the drama queen in her.
‘OK,’ I said. ‘I’ll bite. What did he say his name was?’
‘Jack the Revelator.’
The hairs on my neck came to full attention. Drama queen or not, Cora Maxwell knew how to deliver a punch line. ‘You sure that’s what he said?’
‘Damn sure, Inspector.’
‘Then what happened?’
‘I felt dizzy. I tried standing up and found myself flat on the floor. Then I passed out. Next thing I know, I'm on this bed with some flatfoot slapping my face and telling me to wake up.’
‘That was Constable Riley, sir,’ the uniform chipped in. ‘He was the first officer on the scene.’
‘The chap who’s just parted ways with his breakfast?’
‘That’s him, sir. He’s always doing that.’
‘But it wasn’t him who found the body?’
‘No, sir. That was Citizen Elmore Brecht from the Sanitation Department. He’d come to spray the apartment. When no one answered the door, he let himself in with a skeleton key. They’re allowed to do that.’
 ‘What time was this?’
‘About six.’
‘A bit bloody early, isn’t it?’
‘Not for an exterminator. Those guys work seriously long hours.
That figured. If my apartment was anything to go by, the cockroaches in Kaza were getting the upper hand. ‘Where is he now?’
‘Spraying the rest of the building. I told him to wait till you got here but he said no can do. Too many cockroaches, not enough time. Do you want me to go fetch him?’
‘No. Tell him to drop by the police station to make a statement. And warn him he’s about to become famous.’ I pointed a finger at Cora Maxwell. ‘You’re coming with me to the Precinct House.’
‘Am I under arrest?’
‘Not if you co-operate.’
 I strode back into the living room. Sure enough, a bottle of Kaza Dry No. 2 sat on the table alongside a glass tumbler. ‘Bag those,’ I told Constable Riley, ‘and get them to the path lab, pronto.’
Gene Hooke was packing away his equipment. ‘Did you get anything useful out of the girl?’
I turned to give Citizen Wyman a full-on view of the smug grin on my face. He was on his knees, examining the corpse. ‘You were wrong when you said this murder has nothing to do with the other six.’
Wyman wiped his face with his handkerchief. ‘Oh? How come?’
Before I could answer, Studebaker strode out of the study looking pleased with himself. ‘You’ll never believe what I found behind the books in the book case.’
I took a punt. ‘A set of surgical instruments. The sort a maniac might use to remove organs from a corpse.’
‘Lucky guess.’
‘An educated one.’ I nodded in the direction of the late Anton Delgado. ‘Sergeant Studebaker, meet the late, unlamented Jack the Revelator. Case closed.’


2. Navigation

But, of course, it wasn’t closed. Not by a long chalk. Although I was certain Delgado was Jack the Revelator, aka the West Side Ripper, I still had to prove it. I also had to account for how he ended up having the back of his head caved in with an iron poker.
That was the reason I was taking Cora Maxwell down to the Precinct House. She was going to tell me every little thing she’d seen and heard from the moment she’d first set eyes on Delgado right up to her wake-up call from Constable Riley. And she wasn’t going to leave my sight until I was convinced there wasn’t a gram of information left to be squeezed from her.
‘You’re one lucky lady,’ I told her as we headed for the nick in my slightly battered Kaza Sedan-7. ‘If things had gone the way Delgado had planned, it would be your body penciled in for a stay in the morgue, not his.’
She took out a packet of Kaza Gold Filtered. ‘You mind if I smoke?’
I doubted it mattered whether I did or didn’t. She was the sort of woman who generally got her own way, which was why she was in the front passenger seat when standard operating procedure said she should be in the back. I had by now ditched my original assessment of her as being some poor wee sparrow in desperate need of protection. She was more of a hawk.
‘Knock yourself out.’ I turned up the air-con. ‘It’s your lungs you’re ruining.’
With a wry smile, she popped her cigarette between her lips and lit it with a lighter she had tucked inside the fag packet. ‘How long have you been off them, Inspector?’
‘What makes you think I was ever on them?’
‘That sanctimonious crack about my lungs. And the way your face twitched when you saw the cigarettes. It’s only a matter of time before you cave in, so enjoy your holier-than-thou kick while it lasts.’
It was barely mid-morning but already the city was shimmering in the heat. Ragamuffin children chased sand devils beneath the gaze of old men sitting on canopied balconies smoking tobacco and qat.
‘What a depressing neighbourhood.’ Citizen Maxwell expelled a tiny cloud of smoke with every syllable. ‘I detest brownstone.’
‘Tell me about it. I happen to live in one of these tenement blocks.’
‘Poor you.’
Oh yes. Poor me. Still way down the waiting list for a decent pad despite being a Detective Inspector. You’d think my position would count for something, but apparently not.
‘Being a cop,’ I’d been told by more than one Housing Department jerk, ‘doesn’t entitle you to special treatment. ’
We passed a building site that had been a building site longer than I cared to remember. BUILDING FOR A BETTER KAZA, said a billboard. If the sign writer had been honest, he’d have added the word SLOWLY.
A handful of workmen lounged on the scaffolding, drinking vodka, playing cards and reading magazines. Perhaps sometime before they knocked off they would find it in them to lay a few bricks or mix some cement, but I wouldn’t have put money on it.
A left turn took us onto the Strip where traffic was building up nicely. Brightly coloured tuk-tuks, rickshaws, buses and taxis jostled one another like a carnival of exotic animals. I loved the cacophony of it all – the jungle cries of engines, horns and bells punctuated with angry expletives. For me, the Strip was what Kaza was all about. I owed my sanity to the nights I’d spent cruising its bars, jazz clubs and clip joints.
By day, the Strip wore a mask of respectability. Its coffee shops, wine bars and sidewalk cafes were the very model of gentility and charm. Between dawn and dusk, this was where the fashionista and intelligentsia gathered to swap fashion tips, outrageous gossip and the odd gem of philosophical wisdom.
We stopped at a red light not a dozen steps from the Cafe Voltaire. When I saw a sign saying the place was under new ownership and closed for refurbishment, a little piece of me died.
Citizen Maxwell followed the direction of my scowl. ‘A dive,’ she said. ‘They should dynamite the joint.’
And that's when it came to me. A memory of a night in the Cafe Voltaire, surrounded by goonies and gawpers and people who thought they were being cool when all they were doing was disappearing up their own jacksies. 
Calling itself The Home of Performance Art, the Cafe Voltaire prided itself on hosting the edgiest shows in town. And by edgiest they clearly meant most pretentious.
I recalled some guy on stage cutting up the clothes he was wearing until he was completely naked. And that was followed by a man creating spontaneous poetry by reading out every sixth word of a pornographic novel.
I shouldn’t like shit like that, but I do.
It must have been two in the morning when Cora Maxwell took to the stage. Only she didn’t call herself Cora Maxwell; she was The Silence.
The joint was almost empty. When I’d walked in with my two buddies, we’d had problems finding a table. Now my buddies were gone and I had a table all to myself and could have had several more if I'd wanted. 
There wasn’t enough cigarette smoke in the air for my taste, so I lit a Kaza No. 6 and watched a couple of stagehands wheel what looked like a random assemblage of junk onto the stage.
Here we go again, I thought. Yet more found art. And now I get to endure some self-deluded geek telling me how a trip to the municipal garbage dump transformed their understanding of the boundaries of art.
A spotlight kicked in, giving me a clearer view of the whatever-the-hell-it-was. Now it resembled a control console, not unlike the one the traffic department used for controlling Kaza’s traffic lights.
Standing up, I was able to make out a keyboard that might have been cannibalised from an electric organ. Sitting down again, I took a swig of whiskey and braced myself for a riot of tedious nonsense.
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ said the M.C. from the side of the stage, ‘I give you the Silence!’
A smattering of applause. One lone snigger. And a wall of indifference.
She had on an elegant black dress, the sort people wear to the opera. It was offset by a purple sash and a pearl necklace. Her hair was the way it was in her identity card photo – golden and shoulder length. 
Sitting behind the console on a piano stool, she peeled off her long black gloves then set about bringing the machine to life by flicking switches and hitting buttons.
The contraption hummed. Electrical valves glowed. Relays engaged. Lights flickered.
With a chattering like joke shop wind-up teeth, the machine chomped away at a strip of computer tape wrapped around a metal spool. When the last of the tape had disappeared into the machine's innards, the woman who called herself The Silence spoke into a microphone. ‘Ladies and gentlemen, it never snows in Kaza-Blanka. We may all have experienced snow in our past lives, but we have no way of knowing. Some believe snow doesn’t actually exist, and who can blame them? We live in a city surrounded by desert. Heat stroke awaits anyone who ventures out during the day without a hat or a parasol. We could not survive here without air conditioning, so it’s hard to imagine anywhere so cold that rain becomes solid.’ She raised her hands and closed her eyes. ‘One day, I hope to know how it feels to have snow fall on my skin. The music I’m about to play is inspired by that hope. It’s called Midnight Snow.’
Her fingers descended onto the keyboard and brought forth a Dm7 chord that rose like a fountain and dissipated into a fine mist of tumbling notes. Its tonality was electronic and ethereal, mechanical and magical.
The piece that followed was a requiem and a lullaby rolled into one. It was about life; it was about death. Unhurried, mournful and majestic, it stayed with me for days afterward.
The Silence didn’t seem to play the music so much as distil its essence from the air. By flicking switches and tuning dials, she was able to change the voice of her machine. Sometimes it sounded like a solitary violin or trumpet, other times a whole orchestra.
When she was done, I was drained.
‘What was that thing you played?’ I asked Citizen Maxwell as the lights turned green and the traffic on the Strip got flowing again. ‘That machine of yours?’
‘I call it an electro-clavier.’
‘I’d sure like to meet the geek who put that together. He must be some sort of genius.’
‘Actually, Inspector Arsehole, I built it myself. And me a mere woman! Who’d have thought?’
That was my foot well and truly in it. And just when we were beginning to get along. ‘You played it beautifully,’ I said, desperate to remedy the situation. ‘And you have a real gift for composition.’
‘Thank you,’ she said acidly. ‘Coming from you, that means so much.’

3. Interrogation

The interrogation did not go according to plan – the plan being to sweat Citizen Maxwell in a cell for a couple of hours before hauling her arse into an interrogation room and hitting her with the good cop/bad cop routine. My ungentlemanly intentions unraveled the moment we stepped into the reception area and someone wolf whistled.
‘Knock it off, Radcliffe,’ I warned. ‘This one ain’t for you.’
Radcliffe licked her lips then mouthed a kiss at Citizen Maxwell. ‘I bet you look real sweet in handcuffs, honey.’
Sniggers all round.
‘Not half as sweet as I do in leg restraints,’ Citizen Maxwell retorted. ‘I’ll send you some photos if you like.’
More sniggers. Radcliffe was baffled.
Sergeant Melrose manned the desk. Handsome, polite, well-read, he was everything a desk sergeant shouldn’t be.
‘Why are you still here, Constable?’ he asked. ‘Shouldn’t you be on traffic duty?’
Radcliffe’s face took on a rosy complexion. Traffic duty was for rookies and those who fucked up. She was no rookie. ‘I’m on my way.’
As she walked by, she gave Citizen Maxwell’s backside a slap. Citizen Maxwell blew her a kiss.
I turned my gaze on the other uniforms hanging around gawping.
‘Fuck off the lot of you. Anyone still here in five seconds is joining Radcliffe on traffic duty.’
Four seconds later and the only people in the reception area were Citizen Maxwell, myself and Sergeant Melrose.
I guided Citizen Maxwell to the desk.
‘I do so apologise for the behaviour of my colleagues,’ said Sergeant Melrose. ‘I hope you weren’t offended.’
‘Boys will be boys.’
‘And morons will be morons.’
‘Citizen Maxwell,’ I announced, ‘is a material witness to a homicide. She is here of her own volition and has volunteered to make a statement.’
‘You’re not booking her?’ Melrose seemed relieved. ‘I presume you want Interview Room 3?’
Oh yes. Interview Room 3, a.k.a. the fish tank – so called because of the two-way mirror which made it a magnet for the type of cop who gets their jollies watching beautiful women being put through the grinder.
‘I’ll take Citizen Maxwell’s statement in my office. Make sure we’re not disturbed.’

My office had started life as a store room, which explained the lack of windows and the ghostly outlines of departed filing cabinets on the floor. Not that you could see much of the floor on account of the cardboard boxes housing the best part of my record collection.
Not only did I love my office, I loved that I loved it. When I’d made D.I., the Chief had allocated me the place as his way of saying the promotion wasn’t his idea. He wanted me to hate the place, so I made damn sure I didn’t.
 ‘Nice,’ said Citizen Maxwell as I scrambled over the desk to get to my chair. ‘So compact too.’
I presumed she was talking about the room.
‘You’ll have to forgive the mess,’ I told her. ‘I keep most of my more valuable belongings here. That way they’re less likely to get eaten.’
‘Eaten?’
‘The rats in my apartment block have developed a taste for vinyl.’
She pulled a 78 out of one of the boxes. ‘Art Mankey? A bit old school for my tastes.’
‘His later stuff sucks big time,’ I conceded. ‘It’s only his first dozen or so disks that interest me. They show a lot of promise that was never realised.’ 
Citizen Maxwell put the disk back where she found it. ‘Are all your records 78s?’
‘33s are an abomination.’
‘I agree. The sound quality leaves a lot to be desired.’
‘And don’t get me started on stereo.’
‘OK. I won’t.’ Citizen Maxwell sat down and made herself as comfortable as circumstances allowed.
I recorded her statement on a reel-to-reel tape recorder. With a little prompting from me here and there, she told much the same story she’d given back at Anton Delgado’s apartment.
When she got to the part about Delgado announcing he was Jack the Revelator, I jumped in. ‘Do you recall his exact words?’
‘I am Jack the Revelator, instrument of God’s will.’
‘Had you heard the name before?’
‘No. But you obviously had. When I said it, you went pale – not that your face is overly blessed with colour in the first place. Do you want to tell me what this is all about, Inspector?’
‘Finish up, then I’ll give you the full skinny.’
She completed her testimony in a few more sentences and I hit the tape recorder’s off switch.
‘Whisky?’ I retrieved my work bottle from under the desk.
‘I’m not sure I should. Whatever your friend Jack slipped me has left me with a hangover.’
‘What you need is a hair of the dog.’ I retrieved two glasses and poured. ‘This will flush the drug out of your system – I think.’
‘And I’m going to need a drink to steady my nerves, because you’re just about to tell me what a nasty man Jack the Revelator is and I’m going to be all a-tremble.’
‘Spot on. Now drink.’
Citizen Maxwell did as she was told. I half-expected her to crease up, clutching her belly and yelling, ‘It burns! It burns!’. She didn’t even pull a face.
‘A seasoned whisky drinker,’ I observed. ‘Cheers!’
I hoped she didn’t notice my hand shaking as I lifted the glass to my lips.
‘Well go on,’ Citizen Maxwell challenged. ‘Now that we’re both fortified, let me have it.’
‘You’ve heard of the West Side Ripper?’
‘I you as the copper who’s hunting him. Remember?’
‘Oh yeah. Well, you’ve no doubt read in the papers all the gory details about him cutting open his victims and making of with their internal organs. It kind of gives the impression that the press know as much about the Ripper as we do.’
‘And you’re going to tell me they don’t.’
‘Well, there’s one detail we managed to keep from the gentlemen of the Fourth Estate. Once it became public knowledge that I was on the case, the Ripper took to sending me letters. Dear Pen Pal is the way they always began. Then there’d be a few pages of what I can only describe as the writings of a lunatic. Stuff about him being the instrument of God’s will sent to Kaza-Blanka to punish the unworthy and so forth. After that, he tended to get personal. According to him, I was the lousiest copper in history with absolutely zero chance of catching him. It was the sort of crap you’d expect from a deluded psycho. Anyway, the point is he always signed off as – you’ve guessed it – Jack the Revelator.’
‘So, thanks to me, you now have a serial killer in your morgue. I seem to have done your job for you.’
‘Don’t flatter yourself. All you did was get yourself knocked out. That hardly falls under the heading of sterling police work. Another few days and I’d have nabbed the bastard good and proper.’
‘Oh dear. I seem to have rattled your cage and that wasn’t my intention. I do apologise, Inspector. The nick was entirely yours and I’m no more than an innocent bystander.’
‘Unlike the mystery man who saved your life by doing away with Anton Delgado, aka the West Side Ripper, aka Jack the Revelator.’ A slug of whisky soothed my ruffled feathers. I topped up Citizen Maxwell’s glass to show there were no hard feelings. ‘Unfortunately, by doing so, he’s replaced one set of mysteries with another. I don’t suppose you’ve any clue as to who he might be?’
‘I’m afraid my powers of observation aren’t at their best when I’m unconscious.’
‘You didn’t notice anyone following you to Delgado’s flat?’
‘Nope.’
‘Or anyone hanging around outside? Or maybe you saw someone odd on the Rue Dante?’
‘It’s the Rue Dante. Of course I saw someone odd.’ Citizen Maxwell took out her cigarettes and waved the pack in my direction. I shook my head and made a gesture to convey she was quite welcome to fill my office with noxious fumes. ‘Of course, there’s one obvious question that would be bugging me if I were in your position.’
‘And what’s that?’
‘What was a poker doing in an apartment with no fireplace?’
Before I could even begin to think of a good answer, the phone rang and I snatched it up. ‘Norton.’
‘You and your big mouth, Norton!’ It was the Chief. ‘What do you mean by flapping your gums at the press?’
‘With all due respect, Chief, I don’t know what you’re talking about.’
‘Then I suppose you can’t explain why I’ve just had some dipshit from the Kaza Telegraph telling me we’ve caught the West Side Ripper?’
‘I swear to you Chief, I’ve not spoken to the press and I’ve told no one at the station that this homicide has anything to do with the Ripper.’
‘If you’re lying, Norton, I’m going to arrange for you to spend quality time with some of the villains you’ve banged up. Do I make myself clear?’
‘As always, Chief.’
‘I’ve had to call a press conference to make sure the press tell the story we want them to tell. And you know how much I hate press conferences.’
About as much as a wasp hates jam.
‘Do you want me to be there, Chief?’
‘So you can hog all the credit for a team effort? Not on your Nelly.’ Which was the Chief’s way of saying if anyone was going to be hogging all the credit it was him. ‘There’s an inbound flight due to land at midday. According to the passenger list, there’s a certain Clayton Astley aboard. You remember the little shit-weasel, don’t you?’
‘Sure, Chief.’ How could I forget? Before fleeing Kaza, Astley had been an underworld enforcer, inflicting pain and injury on anyone who dared displease his clients. If he’d stuck around just a day longer, I would have had him under lock and key and heading for the penitentiary where he belonged. But someone had tipped him the wink and he’d beaten me to the airport by a matter of minutes. Once he was airside that was that. I couldn’t touch him.
 But now he was back and I could tie up one of the biggest loose ends of my career. So far, today was turning out a lot better than I’d expected.
‘Get your butt down to the airport, Norton,’ the Chief growled. ‘And see he doesn’t get away again.’

4. Incarceration

Kaza Airport. One landing strip. One terminal building. And an electrified fence patrolled by fierce bastards with fierce dogs.
Having the Arrivals Lounge to myself, I sat by the observation window from where I enjoyed a clear view of the landing strip and the desert beyond. In the distance, the Kaza Mountains were a grey smudge on the horizon.
The clock on the wall told me it was 9:90 – 10 minutes before the flight was due. Which gave me time to think about Anton Delgado and his timely demise.
Citizen Maxwell’s remark about the poker stuck in my mind. Not only was there no fireplace in the apartment, there was no poker rest or any other fireside paraphernalia, which suggested that the poker had been introduced to the crime scene by the killer, which in turn suggested premeditation.
There’d been no sign of a break in and the front door was the sort that locked automatically once closed. It looked likely that Delgado had not only known his murderer but had trusted him enough to let him into his flat in the middle of the night. And that despite the fact that he had an unconscious woman in his bedroom lined up  to be his next victim.
So why had someone come calling on Jack the Revelator at such an ungodly hour, and why had Jack not sent him on his way?
There was one other thing that bothered me. Jack had his back to the killer when the killer struck. You’d think under the circumstances he would be more on his guard. It was yet another indicator that killer and victim were close.
Everything pointed to the worst possible conclusion and I tried to find a flaw in my reasoning but couldn’t. Until I had more information, I was going to have to live with the likelihood that Jack had an accomplice and the killings would continue.
The distant drone of a twin-engined turbo-prop brought me back to the here and now. Looking up, I could see the aircraft on the horizon.
A voice leapt out of the public address system. ‘Flight 001 from Elsewhere is now approaching the airport. All immigration staff to their stations, please. Passengers waiting to board the outbound Flight 002 to Elsewhere are asked to remain in the Departures Lounge until given further instructions. Thank you.’
From a hitherto locked door, a platoon of airport staff trooped into the Arrivals Lounge. Some wore the blue and white uniform of the Immigration Service but most were in civvies. A couple of guys sporting Red Cross arm bands flanked a uniformed nurse who, despite having her hair in a bun and wearing no discernible make-up, looked rather tasty.
‘Detective Inspector Norton! Long time no see!’ Jules Wilde was suddenly upon me, shaking my hand and slapping me on the shoulder. ‘How have you been keeping?’
‘Fine. How’s tricks in the Immigration Department?’
‘Never mind that! What about you catching the West Side Ripper? I bet that sourpuss Chief of yours was pleased!’
Ever since we’d spent a rowdy night on the Strip, getting pissed and creeping into joints two fine upstanding citizens like ourselves shouldn’t even know existed, Jules had decided that I was – as he’d once drunkenly expressed it – his ‘bestest buddy in the whole wide world’.
Jules probably had dozens of ‘bestest buddies in the whole wide world’; he was that kind of a guy. He seemed to take an instant liking to everyone he met, and they to him.
‘I hear you got promoted,’ I said in an attempt to deflect the conversation.
‘Deputy Head of Resettlement and Integration.’
‘It’s been a long time coming, Jules. I’m pleased for you.’
‘Yeah, yeah, yeah. But what about the Ripper? Rumour has it that he’s someone high up in City Hall. Perhaps even the Mayor.’
‘Now you’re fishing.’
‘You bet.’
‘Well I ain’t biting.’
Jules looked at his clipboard. ‘I see you’ve come to arrest that slime ball Astley. You’ve got to wonder how bad life in Elsewhere must be when the likes of him get desperate enough to return here to face prison.’
‘99% of people who leave Kaza don’t come back,’ I pointed out. ‘So I guess they must be happy wherever they are. Or at least happier.’
‘Do you ever think about it, Inspector? Returning to Elsewhere?’
‘Not really. A man knows when he’s where he belongs.’
‘I reckon before I arrived I was a cop like you. Sometimes I wake up and find myself thinking I must get down to the Precinct House to crack the case. They say some of our dreams are actually memories of Elsewhere. Do you suppose it’s true?’
‘Perhaps.’ I had to raise my voice because the plane was directly over us as it turned towards the runway. ‘But how would we know which dreams are memories and which are just dreams?’
‘I never remember my dreams anyway.’
Jules broke away to take up position by the entrance. A sign above the door cautioned that anyone leaving the lounge to go airside would be forcibly deported to Elsewhere. No ifs. No buts. No right of appeal.
There was another much larger sign on the wall. In white lettering on a red background, it presented the reader with the first chapter of the so-called Citizens Charter.

ATTENTION NEWCOMERS.
You have come to Kaza-Blanka of your own free will in order to leave your past behind. You remember nothing of that past because you consented to the erasure of your memories of where you were and what you did before boarding the plane to Kaza-Blanka. If you have been in Kaza-Blanka before, your memories of here remain intact, although it may take time for them to return in full. Your memories of the place you must now call Elsewhere will be given back to you should you ever opt to return to your old life.
This is a new beginning for you.
What you did in Elsewhere is no longer relevant. Whatever drove you here cannot follow you. Your crimes need not haunt you. Your sins are forgiven. Your troubles are no more. The past is erased.
The Twin City of Kaza-Blanka welcomes you without reservation or prejudice.
Here we believe in government of the people, by the people, for the people. We also believe that each should take according to their needs and give according to their ability. If you share these values, then you will surely thrive.
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity for all!

The plane touched down and taxied up to the terminal. With a final burst of splutters, the engines shut down and the propellers came to rest.
I unbuttoned my raincoat to ensure my holstered gun was on view. Then I took out my handcuffs and Clayton Astley’s arrest warrant.
The staircase tender trundled up to the plane. When it was in place, the passenger door slid open and the passengers began to disembark. As usual, most of them looked as if they couldn’t quite believe the enormous step they’d taken. Just about every last one of them would be wondering if they’d done the right thing or made the biggest mistake of their life. Of course, with no memory of anything they did before boarding Flight 001, they had no way of knowing.
 The p.a. burst into life again. ‘Passengers are reminded that they must go straight to the Arrivals Lounge. Anyone still airside when the door closes will be deported back to Elsewhere.’
The immigrants carried identical brown suitcases. This, along with whatever money they’d transferred to the Bank of Kaza, would form the embryo of their new lives in Kaza-Blanka.
Clayton Astley was the last to leave the plane. Understandably in no hurry to fall into my welcoming arms, he kept looking over his shoulder at the plane.
As he reached the door, he clocked me and the wind in his sails failed him. He stood stock still and I have never seen a face filled with so much uncertainty in all my life.
‘Do come in, Citizen Astley,’ Jules Wilde taunted. ‘We don’t want you getting sunstroke, do we?’
Astley didn’t seem to hear. He stared at me like I was some awful apparition. Perhaps he was hoping to make me disappear through the power of wishful thinking.
‘The terminal door will close in twenty-five seconds,’ warned the p.a.. ‘Anyone still airside when the door closes will be transported back to Elsewhere. Please make your way indoors now.’
The other passengers were being escorted out to the esplanade where a bus awaited them. After a briefing from Jules or one of his minions, they would be taken to their new homes, given their social security numbers and told what job had been allocated to them.
Astley was like a frightened animal. I sensed that any sudden move on my part would cause him to scurry back to the plane, leaving me with no prisoner and the certainty of yet another bollocking from the Chief.
Jules looked at the clock. ‘You have ten seconds, Citizen Astley. Nine... eight... seven... six... five...’
With a scowl, Astley stepped through the door. It swung shut behind him and locked itself with a click that must have sounded to the poor sap like the hammer of a gun being pulled back.
‘Welcome to Kaza-Blanka, Citizen Astley.’ Jules clicked his heels and saluted. ‘Your escort awaits.’
I strolled up to the little skid mark and gave him my best smile so he could be in no doubt how pleased I was to see him. ‘Do me a favour, Astley. Punch me in the face and make a run for it. I think you’d look good with a bullet in your back.’
Astley let go of his suitcase and proffered his hands for cuffing. ‘Still the same arsehole as ever you were, Inspector. Things in Kaza-Blanka never really change, do they?’

Back at the nick, I was disappointed to find Citizen Maxwell gone. Of course she had every right to leave whenever she wanted, but I was miffed that she hadn’t at least left a note to say goodbye.
I spent the next few hours wading through largely pointless paperwork with a break to watch the Chief’s press conference on the television in the squad room. As expected, I barely got a mention, and the way the Chief told it, you’d think he’d personally busted open the case with a combination of dogged determination and great personal sacrifice.
The one good mark he earned from me was for saying nothing about Citizen Maxwell. In the Chief’s version of events, the West Side Ripper had been found dead in his apartment by an unidentified member of the public. Suicide, the Chief said without actually saying it, was the likeliest scenario.
‘Why,’ asked a lady reporter from the Kaza Star, ‘would he have killed himself?’
‘Nobody said he killed himself. But to me it looks like he knew I was closing in on him so took the coward’s way out.’
Bleugh! It took three slugs of whisky to rid my mouth of the bad taste left by the Chief’s performance.
Paperwork done, I decided to knock off early. I reckoned I deserved it.

5. Libation

Samson’s Bar on the Strip was my idea of what a bar should be – all wood and dinginess. What little daylight managed to get in fell through a grimy skylight to be sliced up by wooden beams so it hit the floor in stripes. Everything in the place that wasn’t black and white seemed to be brown - the exception being the walls. They sported a shade of yellow I’ve seen nowhere else.
As I parked my arse on a stool at the bar, Jimmy the Goose already had a shot lined up for me. I downed it in one.
‘Been that kind of a day, has it?’ Jimmy topped up my glass. ‘I saw your boss on the television blowing his horn. You weren’t kidding when you said he’s a totally up himself.’
‘He’ll get his,’ I declared with no certainty that he would. ‘But bollocks to him. I’m here to celebrate. Will you do me a steak sandwich, Jimmy?’
‘You want it at your usual table?’
‘Where else?’
My usual table was occupied, but not for long. One jerk of Jimmy’s thumb was enough to send the interlopers scurrying off elsewhere.
Jimmy left me with a beer, a bottle of Kaza No. 5 and a bowl of peanuts. I sat watching television, knowing I was being watched in turn. The denizens of Samson’s Bar were aware I was a cop and had something to do with the West Side Ripper. They wanted nothing more than for me to shoot my mouth off and give them inside info they could impress their friends with. But that wasn’t going to happen and they knew it.
The telly was tuned to Kaza News 10. It was all sports peppered with commercial breaks and pointless weather forecasts. Today was sunny. Tomorrow would be sunny too. And there’d be no break in the sunshine until the rainy season arrived.
I was halfway through my steak sandwich when an item about some piss-poor basketball team was interrupted by what the newsreader called a breaking story.
‘We’re now going over to the Sanitation Department where Kaza News 10 reporter Citizen Ed Crowe has just caught up with the man who tracked down and killed the so-called West Side Ripper.’
The picture cut to a head and shoulders of Ed Crowe. ‘Thank you, Bill. I’m standing on the steps leading to the entrance to the Sanitation Department with Sanitation Engineer Citizen Elmore Brecht, a brave man with an extraordinary story to tell.’
There was a cut to a two shot. Elmore Brecht stood on the steps in his work overalls, his canister of cockroach poison at his side.
‘Citizen Brecht, could you tell us in your own words how you cracked a case that has baffled the Kaza Police Department from the very get-go?’
As Crowe pointed a microphone at him, Elmore Brecht grinned the cheesiest of grins made all the cheesier by the presence of a gold molar. ‘Well, Ed, it was like this, see. I was on duty in the Rue Morgue, up nice and early so I could kill me some cockroaches while most folks was still in bed. My canister of roach powder was empty, so I went back to my van to refill it. As I was doing so, I saw this car pull up and I knew there was something bad about it. Don’t ask how I knew; I just did.
‘Anyways, this dude gets out and he is the meanest, most evil-looking dude I ever did see. Elmore, I says to myself, there something ain’t right about this. So I hide behind my van and watch what the dude gets up to.’
‘And what did he get up to?’
‘I’m just coming to that, Ed. What he got up to is a whole load of no good. I saw him open the trunk of his car and take out what I thought must be a dog he’d run over or something but which I soon realised was a woman. I didn’t know if she was dead or just plain drunk, but I knew something was up ’cause no one brings their date home in the trunk of a car no matter how juiced they are.
‘So anyways, I follow the dude at a safe distance into an apartment block and up one – no, two – flights of stairs to what I now know was his apartment. Now, I ain’t never peeped through no keyholes before, but this looked like a good time to start. So I get down on my knees and I peep and can hardly believe what I’m seeing. The girl’s awake and standing butt-naked right in the middle of the living room. I could tell she was drugged because she had this glazed look like people get when they inhale roach powder. I knew she was there in body but her mind was someplace else.’ Elmore’s grin grew cheesier. ‘May I take a moment, Ed, to tell that young lady that she has one hell of a fine body, and if she’s ever at a loose end for something to do, she can contact me through the Sanitation Department. Man, that is one great pair of jubbers she’s got.’
A panicked Ed Crowe attempted a laugh which sounded like a cat being strangled. ‘I’m sure the lady’s got the message, Elmore. In the meantime, our viewers are dying to know what happened next.’
‘Oh yeah. Well then the dude starts saying some crazy stuff about how all women are whores and they should be ashamed of themselves and he’s going to teach them all a lesson. And then he produces this real nasty looking knife – about this long and real, real sharp – and I just know I gotta do something.
‘So I break down the door and, without a moment’s thought for my own safety, I throw myself at the dude and we have quite a wrestling match. And all the time he’s trying to stab me with his knife but I don’t let him ’cause I’ve been stabbed before and know how much it hurts. Then eventually I hit him on the back of the head with a poker and kill him.’
‘A poker?’
‘Yeah. I carry one with me most times. It’s handy for getting at roaches in awkward places.’
From behind the bar, Jimmy gave vent to a dirty guffaw. ‘Is that how it happened, Inspector? Have we all been saved from certain death by a bug exterminator?’
‘The guy is full of shit,’ I said, loud enough for everyone to hear. ‘The Ripper was already dead when Brecht found him.’
‘So, if he didn’t kill the West Side Ripper, who did?’
‘I only wish I knew.’ My appetite for food was gone. I pushed away what was left of my sandwich and threw whisky down my throat.
If she’s ever at a loose end for something to do, she can contact me ...
In your dreams, Citizen Brecht. Jubbers indeed!
I didn’t want to be in Samson’s any more. All the things that usually made it great – the dinginess, the grubbiness, the general air of sleaze – now served to depress me. It was as if Elmore Brecht’s disgusting essence had somehow seeped out of the television screen.
I had the blues and this wasn’t the place to drink them away.
As I reached for my wallet, something happened to change my mind. Cora Maxwell walked in.
Now she was out of hooker mode and dressed like a jazz cat in black slacks, white T shirt, black satin jacket and white fedora, she seemed a whole different woman. She looked stunning and a couple of wolf whistles said I wasn’t the only one who thought so.
‘All right, you guys. Knock it on the head.’ Jimmy whacked the top of his bar with a pool cue. ‘Just remember your manners.’
Citizen Maxwell took off her sunglasses. ‘Thank you, Jimmy. It’s good to know there are still some gentlemen left in this city.’
‘Your usual table, Citizen Maxwell?’
‘I’m rather hoping the Inspector will invite me to join him for a drink.’
If ever there was a moment when Jimmy the Goose could have been knocked down with a feather, this was surely it. As he escorted Citizen Maxwell to my table, he gave me a look that was a curious mixture of respect and puzzlement. 
I decided to play it casual. ‘So you two know each other?’
‘The lady is a regular here,’ said Jimmy. ‘Only this is the first time I’ve seen her all dolled up like this.’
Citizen Maxwell sat down. ‘My usual, please, Jimmy.’
 The barman trotted off like a dog sent to fetch his mistress’s slippers. All his hard edges seemed to have dissolved away.
‘A regular?’ I echoed. ‘Here?’
‘I pop in every now and then.’
‘How come I’ve never seen you?’
‘You have. You’ve just never noticed.’
‘Don’t think I’m trying to flatter you, Citizen Maxwell, but you are not the sort of woman I would fail to notice.’
‘When the fancy takes me, I can be the sort of woman no man notices. Why do you think I call myself the Silence?’
‘There’s a difference between silence and invisibility.’
‘Not if you’re blind, Inspector.’
She had a point. Or I thought she did. Frankly, I didn’t know if she was being profound or just plain pretentious. She was playing mind games with me and had the advantage of first serve.
‘You always come in here alone, Inspector, like this is your special place and you don’t want to share it.’
‘I’m sharing it now, aren’t I?’
‘I can go away if you like.’
‘Don’t you dare.’
Citizen Maxwell took a sip of my whisky. ‘Jimmy’s still watering it down, I see. It’s a wonder you don’t arrest him.’
‘If the police arrested every bar owner in the city who adulterated their liquor, there’d be no room in the Penitentiary for anyone else.’
Jimmy the Goose plonked a tall glass on the table. ‘There you go, Citizen Maxwell. One gin and tonic on the house.’
‘Thank you, Jimmy. I sure appreciate it.’
Jimmy hovered, as if waiting to be dismissed. I had never seen him do it before and it made me nervous.
‘Hey!’ he said, suddenly, slapping my arm with the back of his hand. ‘Tell Citizen Maxwell about the kook on the telly. The one who says he killed the West Side Ripper.’
Damn Jimmy. I could have done without him bringing that up.
‘I’m sure Citizen Maxwell doesn’t want to know about kooks on the telly,’ I said, attempting to express with the inflection of my voice that Jimmy had outstayed his welcome.
But Jimmy wasn’t one for taking hints. ‘Jubbers! That’s what he said. You ever hear that expression before? I run a bar and I could have sworn I’d heard every possibly term for a lady’s – and I hope you’ll pardon the expression, Citizen Maxwell – tits but I gotta say jubbers is a new one on me.’
Imagine tin foil coming into contact with your fillings at the very instant someone runs their fingernails down a blackboard and you realise you’re only wearing a vest and you’re standing in the middle of a crowded shop and someone takes a photo. Imagine that feeling and multiply it by a million. Now you’re somewhere in the vicinity of where I was.
 ‘Jubbers?’ Citizen Maxwell seemed to chew over the word in her mind. The slow lifting of an eyebrow showed she was processing it. ‘You say he killed the West Side Ripper?’
‘No,’ Jimmy corrected. ‘That’s what he says. The inspector says he’s full of crap and I believe him.’
‘And he said jubbers in relation to what?’
‘The girl the Ripper was about to turn into a pyjama case when he burst in and heroically saved her.’
‘Sounds like a brave man.’
‘Except he ain’t. He made the whole thing up and in doing so has robbed the inspector of his fully-deserved glory. Right, Inspector?’
The conversation was taking me in no direction I wanted to go, but the current was too strong to swim against. ‘As it happens, the Ripper was already dead when Elmore Brecht found him.’
‘And the broad?’
‘Unconscious.’
‘Did she have nice jubbers like the guy said?’
‘A nice everything, Jimmy. The girl was pure class.’
‘And unconscious, you say?’ For a moment, Jimmy was lost in some sordid reverie before his inner decency pulled him back. ‘She wasn’t hurt, was she? Or injured in any way?’
‘As far as I can tell, she came out of it just fine.’
‘Good. I hate it when broads get hurt. It ain’t right.’
The arrival of a fresh customer left Jimmy with no choice but to drift back to the bar. I sat staring up at the skylight, wondering if I’d set a new record for embarrassment.
Citizen Maxwell touched my hand. ‘So I have nice jubbers?’
‘Elmore Brecht’s words – not mine.’
‘That’s right. You said I had a nice everything.’
‘If you care to look beneath my raincoat, you’ll find my gun in its holster. You have my full permission to take it out and shoot me.’
She laughed. ‘Oh you poor man. You’re not used to complimenting women, are you?’
‘That was a compliment?’
‘Yes it was, Inspector Arsehole. Now order me another drink and let’s discuss our plans for the evening.’ 
6. Relaxation

We took in a movie. Dark Encounter with Howard Taylor and Naomi Thurman. Two people arrive in Kaza-Blanka on Flight 001 from Elsewhere. He sets up shop as a dentist; she makes jewelry and sells it from a stall in Penny Lane Market. They fall in love but never consume their passion.
And why do they deny themselves the intimacy they so clearly crave? Because they’re both certain they’ve left someone behind in Elsewhere. Someone they loved. Someone they cared for. Someone they remember absolutely nothing about.
They couldn’t let go and they didn’t know what it was that they couldn’t let go of. Or something like that.
To be honest, I didn’t get it.

As night fell and the city became noticeably cooler in both temperature and temperament, Citizen Maxwell and I strolled along the Embankment and talked about Dark Encounter. Or, rather, she talked, I listened.
‘The way I see it,’ she said, ‘neither character had left behind anything or anybody worth a damn, but they couldn’t bring themselves to admit it. They were unable to accept that their lives really were empty and meaningless.
 ‘For them, as it is with most of us poor lost souls in Kaza, Elsewhere was a blank screen onto which they could project their hopes and dreams. It was that other place where all things are possible and the virtuous are rewarded for their goodness. Remember what the Naomi Thurman character said towards the end of the film? That thing about why wait for death when we can have the afterlife right now?’
‘Just hop on a plane,’ I quoted, ‘and all our troubles will be behind us.’
Citizen Maxwell proceeded to dissect the film scene by scene, beat by beat. From the allusions and comparisons she made, she was clearly a real film buff and had probably seen every film ever released in Kaza at least once.
So deep, I thought with admiration. For a prostitute.
We came to the Bridge of Sighs and stood between the two bronze statues – one a lion, the other a unicorn - that guarded its entrance. Ahead of us, gargoyles crouched along either side of the bridge like a grotesque guard of honour.
‘It’s magnificent,’ said Cora. ‘The unknown artisans who carved these beasts were true craftsmen.’
‘It gives me the creeps,’ I admitted. ‘But you’re right. It is magnificent.’
We climbed onto the observation platform. Across the Kaza River, the city of Blanka with its white towers, domes and minarets stood as still and enigmatic as ever. 
The large sign that warned people not to cross the bridge and not to stop others from doing so must have been recently repainted. It was defaced with far less graffiti than the last time I’d seen it.
Citizen Maxwell lit a cigarette. ‘It’s a strange law that forbids people to prevent others from harming themselves. If I was running the city, I’d make the Bridge of Sighs impassable.’
It was a sentiment often expressed and seldom argued with. Like many laws governing Kaza-Blanka, nobody understood why this one had been enacted, when it had been enacted or even who it had been enacted by. But it was the law and there were penalties for breaking it.
‘Have you ever felt an urge to cross the Bridge of Sighs?’ Citizen Maxwell asked.
‘No. I’ve seen what happens to people who do. It isn’t pleasant.’
‘You’ve only seen the ones who come back. What about the ones who don’t?’
‘They all come back.’
‘Maybe some don’t. People go missing from Kaza all the time. Perhaps some are made welcome in the White City.’
‘Who by?’ I felt a surge of irritation. ‘Look at the place. The buildings are empty. It’s more like a mausoleum than a city.’
‘So how do people get back from there when they’ve had their memories erased?’
‘They return over the Bridge of Sighs.’ I’d seen them with my own eyes, walking like zombies with blank expressions and no idea of anything at all. Thankfully, they always returned at night when there was a curfew around the Bridge and no one to see them except a small team from the Department of Immigration specially trained to deal with what were effectively walking vegetables.
‘What I mean is,’ Citizen Maxwell persisted, like a schoolboy picking at a scab that wouldn’t come away, ‘is how do they get back to the Bridge of Sighs? Someone must guide them there, otherwise they’d be wandering around Blanka until they died of hunger or thirst.’
‘Nobody guides them. It’s just instinct.’
‘You seem quite agitated all of a sudden, Inspector. I hope it’s not something I said.’
‘No,’ I lied. ‘I guess I’m one of those people who like to pretend Blanka doesn’t exist.’
‘That puts you in the majority.’ Citizen Maxwell drew on her cigarette and allowed blue smoke to drift out of her mouth and merge with the evening breeze. ‘I go one better than those who pretend the place doesn’t exist.’
‘Oh? How?’
‘I truly believe that it doesn’t.’ Citizen Maxwell got to her feet and put her cigarette out on the warning board. ‘You need a drink, Inspector.’
She was right. ‘I know a great little bar not ten minutes from here. You’ll like it.’
‘We could go there. Or we could hop on a tram and head back to my place. I think I have enough whisky to keep you going till breakfast.’

7. Fornication

We hopped off the tram at the Place de la Concorde and took our lives in our hands crossing all six lanes of the busiest road in Kaza with seemingly every tuk-tuk driver and moped rider in Kaza intent on mowing us down.
It was only when we were back on a pavement and the imminent threat of death was removed that I realised we were headed for the Artists’ Colony. I knew already that Citizen Maxwell lived on the Rue Matisse but I hadn’t until now given any thought as to where in Kaza that might be. Somehow I’d pictured her living in some squalid little shit hole or conversely a luxury penthouse. It seemed to me that prostitutes were always housed in one or the other.
The colony was surrounded by a high wall upon which cameras perched like monocular crows. A barrier across the only road into the colony served to help keep out the hoi polloi.
In the gatehouse, an armed guard sat watching television. Seeing Citizen Maxwell, his face lost its bored expression. ‘Evening, Citizen Maxwell,’ he chimed, opening the door to let us in.
‘Evening, Sam. How’s the wife?’
‘A lot better now. She thanks you for the flowers.’ Sam looked me up and down. ‘You’re a cop. I used to be one myself until I took a bullet in the hip.’
‘I’m sorry to hear that.’
‘Sorry to hear what? That I was a cop or that I took a bullet?’
‘Both, I guess.’
‘I ain’t sorry about neither. I’ve got me a nice pension, I meet lots of famous people and I get to watch television at work. Kind of a cushy set-up, wouldn’t you say, Citizen?’
‘Apart from the television bit. There’s never anything worth watching.’
‘You’ve got to lower your standards, is all. Makes life easier.’
‘Quite the philosopher, aren’t we?’
‘And one heck of a television critic.’
Saying goodnight to Sam, we passed through the gatehouse, entered the Colony and walked along the middle of the road. 
‘Bungalows, bungalow s everywhere,’ I observed.
‘That’s a line from a poem, isn’t it?’
‘Not as far as I know.’
‘Really? It sounds familiar.’
There was something not quite real about the Artists’ Colony. Or, rather, there was something not quite Kaza about it. What it lacked was the chaos and squalor of the city I knew. Every bungalow was in perfect condition, with no missing roof tiles, no peeling paint, no boarded up windows. Lawns were tidy. Gardens were orderly. It was like a movie set
We strolled down the Rue Picasso. Turned left onto the Rue Duchamp which took us onto the Rue Escher. Halfway down the Rue Escher, the Rue Matisse began.
Number 12 Rue Matisse. Citizen Maxwell’s place of abode. Just another bungalow with a tidy lawn.
‘Nice place,’ I said and I meant it. 
Citizen Maxwell showed me into her living room and I was genuinely pleased to see her electro-clavier standing in the corner. Where I’d have expected the television to be, there stood a metal palm tree. Framed paintings adorned the walls. About a third were cubist; a third were absurdist; and the remainder were surreal.
‘You paint these?’ I asked.
‘No,’ said Citizen Maxwell. ‘I don’t find my own work easy to live with.’
‘Yeah. I sometimes have that problem too,’
‘Give me your coat and make yourself at home. I’ll fetch the whisky.’
Her settee was leather. Leather! In all my life – or at least the life I remembered – I had seen two leather chairs, one leather pouffe and a leather bean bag. This was my first leather settee.
I sat on it and luxuriated in its aroma.
My day had so far consisted of examining a stiff, identifying a mass murderer, arresting an ex-fugitive and going to the flicks with a beautiful woman. But it seemed to me that the most abiding memory of it would be the moment I parked my arse on the tanned skin of a dead animal.
Citizen Maxwell returned minus her jacket and bearing a bottle of Kaza Sour Mash, a couple of tumblers and a bucket of ice. She kicked off her shoes and joined me on the settee. ‘You be mother. I like mine on the rocks.’
I poured us both a good measure – hers on the rocks, mine with a solitary ice cube. It had been a long time since I’d had sour mash and the first sip brought fond memories.
‘I guess this is when you ask me the question,’ said Citizen Maxwell once we were both good and relaxed.
‘And which question would that be?’
‘Am I planning on working tonight?’
‘That wouldn’t be my first question.’
‘Let me guess. You want to know what a nice girl like me is doing turning tricks on the Rue Dante.’
‘You live in the Artists’ Colony, which means you’re a State Registered Artist, which means in turn you pay no rent and get a monthly stipend courtesy of the Municipal Government. You may not be rich, but you’re not exactly poor.’
‘Depends on your definition of poor. You see that machine over there?’ She pointed to her electro-clavier. ‘To build that cost me about the average annual salary of an average civil servant. I know because I had an average civil servant do the sums for me.’
‘Do you still play it?’
‘Not since it stopped working. You were privileged to witness its one and only public appearance – an appearance, mind you, for which I received no payment. Those lousy sons of bitches at the Cafe Voltaire stiffed me good and proper.’
‘You never tried any of the other clubs?’
‘Sure. I even rustled up a few bookings. But they got cancelled when the Musician’s Union threatened to picket any place I played. My machine can take the place of an entire orchestra, and they were scared it would put them out of work.’ Citizen Maxwell picked an ice cube from her glass and ran it along the bottom of her jaw. ‘And now we come to the second question. Am I going to be walking the streets tonight? No, I am not. Nor am I going to be walking them tomorrow or any time soon. It was scary enough when the West Side Ripper was on the loose, but now there’s someone even scarier out there.’
‘There is? Who?’
‘The man who killed the West Side Ripper.’
Son of Jack. I’d forgotten about him. There was no proof he was a serial killer, but there was no proof he wasn’t. If, as I surmised, he was the Ripper’s accomplice then Citizen Maxwell was wise to err on the side of caution.
We were on our third drink when I got around to asking question number three. ‘Why did you come to Samson’s this afternoon?’
 ‘You think I came looking for you, don’t you? You think I couldn’t bear to stay away from you a moment longer.’
I squirmed. ‘Well, no. I wasn’t thinking that at all. It’s just that – you know.’
She leaned forward to flick ash into the pewter ashtray lying between her feet. ‘For a streetwise, battle-hardened cop, you sure are easy to embarrass. If you must know, I did come looking for you. I thought you’d be good company, and so far you haven’t let me down.’
‘You no longer think I’m an arsehole?’
‘You’re an arsehole all right. But you make up for it by being decent.’ She stubbed out her cigarette and turned round so she was kneeling on the settee. ‘I think it’s time I showed you these.’
Citizen Maxwell reached behind the settee and pulled out an artist’s portfolio. ‘Here.’ She placed the portfolio on my lap. ‘Tell me what you think.’
I put my glass on the arm of the settee and opened the portfolio. It was a shock to find myself looking at my own face drawn in pastels. Although well executed, the portrait was hardly flattering, so I didn’t spend much time studying it.
The next piece was me again. This time I was sitting at the bar in Samson’s, reading, of all things, a paperback. It was a charcoal piece that nicely captured the comforting gloom of the bar’s interior.
I flicked through the other sketches in the portfolio and counted twenty-two in all, done in pastel, charcoal, ink, pencil and water colour. Most were of me sitting at the bar or my special table. One showed me standing beneath a street light wearing my raincoat and a Trilby hat.
What the hell was I to make of it all? Did Citizen Maxwell expect me to feel flattered?
I studied her face, looking for some hint of smugness, some sign that she was inwardly laughing at me. But all I could see was an impassive coolness that was hard to read.
‘I don’t like being stalked,’ I told her.
‘I’d hardly call watching someone in a public bar stalking.’
‘How long have you been doing this? Spying on me?’
‘Not spying – observing. And it’s been about three months.’
‘Why in God’s name me of all people?’
‘There were others before you. Other people in other bars. Even other people in Samson’s. And the only thing they had in common was that they were ordinary. I know this will sound pretentious, Inspector, but I don’t get much ordinariness in my life. My neighbours are artists - creative types with a bewildering array of eccentricities, quirks and neuroses. Ordinary is a rare commodity in these parts. If I want it, I have to go and find it.’
‘And you found it in me?’
‘Oodles and oodles of it.’
Ordinary. Just your average Joe. A face in any crowd. Although less than flattering, it was not a description I could argue with. 
Citizen Maxwell shuffled closer. Her thigh was near enough for my own to feel the warmth from it. She smelt of woman, whisky and cigarettes. ‘When you walked into that bedroom this morning to question me, I thought I’d been rumbled. I could see you thinking you knew me from somewhere, and I kept expecting you to blurt out that you had seen me in Samson’s. So it was quite a relief when you mentioned the Cafe Voltaire.
‘Even so, I knew our relationship had changed irreversibly. I was no longer invisible to you, so I thought I’d better come clean.’
Citizen Maxwell took two cigarettes, placed them between her lips and lit them. She held one in front of my face. ‘Go on. You know you’re going to crack sooner or later. You might as well get it over and done with.’
I took the cigarette and for a moment considered stubbing it out. Then I saw Citizen Maxwell draw on hers. I saw the look of bliss on her face. And I saw her breasts rise as she drew the smoke into her lungs. And I was lost.
That first tentative puff after months of abstinence gave me the same sense of relief I get when kicking off a pair of tight shoes.
Tossing aside the portfolio, Citizen Maxwell straddled my lap. ‘Open your mouth.’
‘What for?’
‘Just do it.’ She took a drag of her cigarette, waited for me to obey, placed her mouth close to mine and then blew. ‘Breathe in.’
I breathed deeply, drawing into me (as I saw it) some vital part of her exquisite essence.
The next moments were a frenzy. Our lips didn’t so much touch as collide. My hands found their way to the small of her back. Her fingers teased my neck.
I began to unbutton her blouse but was too slow. She gave the garment a violent tug that caused buttons to fly. Then I all but ripped it to shreds.
A glass bounced across the floor as we rolled from the settee onto the rug.
Afterwards, as we lay on the floor, catching our breath and looking like shipwrecked sailors the sea had tossed onto dry land, I was struck by how little noise Cora had made during our love-making. Perhaps that was a clue as to why she called herself the Silence.
Our cigarettes had found their way to opposite ends of the room. They had both burned out but not before leaving their mark on the wooden floor.

Round two of our coupling was more civilised and took place in Cora’s bedroom. When we were done, I mentioned out of politeness that I should be heading home.
‘Stay,’ said Cora. ’Please.’
I stayed.


8. Damnation

Another day, another murder.
Citizen Elmore Brecht, cockroach exterminator, sat very much dead in an armchair. White powder clogged his mouth and nostrils. It was also sprinkled on his face and torso like talcum powder. His killer had carved the word LIAR across his forehead.
‘Judging by the paucity of spilt blood,’ said Gert Wyman, ‘I would say it was done post mortem.’
There was a flash and a pop as Gene Hooke took a picture of the fumigation canister standing between the dead man’s legs. ‘Steady hand,’ he observed. ‘Whoever wrote that must have taken their time.’
I gave him a look that told him to leave the detective work to the detective. He acknowledged it with a shrug and busied himself photographing the rest of the apartment. And what an apartment it was. Although not particularly large – except compared to my own – it was certainly big enough for a bachelor like Elmore Brecht to rattle around in. The furniture and fittings looked new and must have set him back a fair bit.
The television was about the size of my kitchen sideboard and the electric gramophone was the very model I’d been saving for. A few more weeks and I’d be in a position to make my first down payment.
Just to rub it in, Elmore Brecht was dressed in silk pyjamas with the letter E monogrammed on the shirt pocket.
When I’d entered the apartment and clocked its contents, I’d immediately concluded that Brecht was either a thief or a fence. But then Gene had to go and burst my bubble by pointing out how much an exterminator earned and how much overtime they had access to.
My response was plain. ‘I’m in the wrong fucking job.’
Just as it had been at the last murder scene, the air conditioning was switched off, but this time for good reason. Even in small quantities, roach powder produces unpleasant effects, and the less of it that got into the air, the better.
‘How sure are you that the powder killed him?’ I asked Citizen Wyman.
The fat coroner made a dismissive gesture. ‘You must have come to the same conclusion about that as I did. There’s no sign of a struggle. It looks like he just sat there and let chummy pour poison into whatever orifices came to hand.’
‘So he was either unconscious when it happened or dead.’
‘Dead, Inspector. Roach powder causes convulsions when ingested. Even if your man here was unconscious when it happened, he would not be sitting comfortably.’
I walked around the armchair to inspect the body from all angles. ‘So he was poisoned with something other than roach powder?’
‘Or he died of natural causes. Who knows?’ Wyman leaned towards the corpse. His nostrils twitched. ‘What’s that I smell?’
The fact that he was his usual sweaty self offered an immediate and obvious answer, but I assumed he was talking about the late Citizen Brecht.
Careful not to inhale roach powder, I had a quick sniff. ‘A curious mixture of lavender and body odour. I would say that Citizen Brecht is – or rather was – one of those deluded types who consider a splash of toilet water a decent substitute for a shower.’
‘It’s not Citizen Brecht I can smell. It’s something else.’ Wyman took a couple of steps towards me and sniffed again. ‘Yes. There it is. Not just the expected tang of cheap whisky and bacon grease, although they’re there in abundance.’ He stepped back and pronounced in an accusatory voice: ‘Inspector! You smell of sexual intercourse!’
The constable standing guard at the door sniggered. I made a note to volunteer him for traffic duty.
‘Wow!’ said Gene, taking my photograph. ‘Hold the front page! Inspector Seth Norton gets his end away! Read all about it.’
I was saved from having to come up with a witty and no doubt devastating retort by the ringing of a phone in the bedroom.
‘That will be the victim’s boss,’ I said, taking a handkerchief from my pocket. ‘He’s no doubt wanting to know why everybody’s favourite exterminator isn’t at work today.’
I hurried into the bedroom and, using my handkerchief to preserve fingerprints, picked up the handset. ‘This is the residence of Citizen Elmore Brecht. Who’s speaking, please?’
‘Congratulations, Norton. You’ve really fucked up this time!’ It was the Chief. ‘Can you imagine the field day the press are going to have when they find out you lied when you told them the West Side Ripper was dead? They are going to rip you to shreds. And when they’re done with you, I’m going to glue you back together so I can rip you to shreds all over again!’
‘With all due respect, Chief, you’re talking bollocks.’
This brought the express train that was the Chief’s mouth to a screeching halt. I could picture him at his desk, his face as red and hot as the fires of Hell, smoke gushing from his ears, hate in his eyes and all the cogs in his mind thrown out of sync and clashing against one another.
‘The Ripper’s dead, Chief. Whoever killed him, killed Elmore Brecht. I’m afraid we have a second psycho-killer on our hands.’
‘Did you just say I’m talking bollocks?’
‘Yes, Chief. I certainly did.’
‘Well, you’d better be right, Norton. You’d better be bang on the button.’
The Chief hung up. I expect he went for a nice lie down somewhere quiet.
Gene Hooke was in the doorway. He whistled his appreciation. ‘Do my ears deceive me or did I just hear you tell the Chief he was talking bollocks?’
I put the handset back in its cradle. ‘Nothing wrong with your ears, Gene. It’s my mouth that’s at fault.’

9. Cogitation

‘First thing’s first,’ I told Sergeant Studebaker. ‘We’ve got to come up with a name for our new killer.’
We were in the Incident Room. It resembled a shrine to the West Side Ripper. The walls were covered with maps, photographs, newspaper clippings, notes, drawings, a ticket stub, a lady’s glove and an assortment of other so-called clues that had led us astray.
Looking around, I fancied that my head had exploded and plastered the room with all the information in it regarding the Ripper.
 ‘How about the Ripper Mark 2?’ Studebaker suggested. ‘Or Mark 3?’
‘3?’
‘Well, that bug exterminator who killed the Ripper would be Mark 2. So whoever killed Mark 2 has to be Mark 3.’
‘Let me explain one more time, Sergeant. Citizen Brecht did not kill the West Side Ripper. He claimed he did but – ‘. I broke off at the sight of Studebaker’s stupid grin. ‘Right. You’re yanking my chain.’
‘Got you real good, didn’t I, boss?’
‘Yes. Well done. Good show. Ha fucking ha. Now if we could just come up with a name for our new whacko on the block ...’
‘If this guy really was Jack the Revelator’s partner, he ought to be called Jill the Revelator.’
‘Tell me you’re not serious, Sergeant.’
‘To be honest, that sounded good inside my head. It was only when I started saying it out loud that I realised maybe not.’
‘We’ll call him Son of Jack for now,’ I decided. ‘When the press come up with their own name, we’ll go along with that. Now how many men have we got assigned to us?’
‘Six –and they’re all eager to get things moving. What do you want them to do, boss?’
‘To be honest, Sergeant, I haven’t the faintest idea.’

Lacking a better plan, I sent the team out to go over old Ripper ground. Their orders were to revisit every murder scene, re-examine every bit of evidence and re-question every potential witness. I knew it would do no good, but at least it got them out of my hair. 
In the meantime, I took refuge in my office where I planned to spend the day going through the masses of data we’d compiled during our ineffectual pursuit of the West Side Ripper. There had to be something I’d missed, some hint as to who we were dealing with here.
After an hour cooped up in my office, reading and re-reading reports that made less sense each time I read them, I’d had enough. If there was any new information to be gleaned from the reports, I was not in the right frame of mind to spot it.
A couple of slugs of my work whisky really let me down. After a night downing Kaza Sour Mash, the ordinary stuff just didn’t cut it.
It was a cockroach that spurred me into action. The little bugger strolled across my desk like he had every right to do so. Annoyed by the insect’s insolence, I let him have it with my whisky bottle, bringing it down on his primitive body like a vengeful god.
I missed.
Next thing I knew, I was looking at a broken bottle and a rapidly spreading pool of spilt whisky. The cockroach was nowhere to be seen.
‘Fuck it. I’m going to grab me some culture.’

As far as I knew, the Kaza Institute of Contemporary Art was the only completely white building in Kaza. With its five circular levels, each one smaller than the one below, there was no mystery as to why the people of Kaza called it the Wedding Cake.
A sign in the foyer informed visitors that the KICA building was a fine example of Art Deco housing an eclectic collection of art, only a tiny proportion of which was on display at any one time. Entrance was free but a donation of at least five assignats per visit would be very much appreciated.
I dropped a ten cent coin into the donation box and went through.
After a quick and prurient browse of the Degenerate Art Gallery followed by a leisurely stroll around the Faux-Cubist Gallery, I took the lift to the top floor.
The Rotunda, a circular room built of yellow bricks, stood like a wheel within a wheel in the middle of the gallery. By its entrance was a sign: CORA MAXWELL. ‘THE SILENCE.’
So far I’d pretty much had the KICA to myself, so I was mildly surprised to find other people in the Rotunda. I counted seven in all: an old couple, three guys with a girl and a middle-aged woman dressed in a kaftan.
Almost as if it had been arranged that way to make some point about the Ages of Man, the old people and the young stood on opposite sides of the room with their backs to each other as they studied and deciphered Cora Maxwell’s art.
Kaftan Woman sat in the middle on a circular seat. She had her eyes closed and appeared to be meditating.
A quick glance at the paintings on the wall reassured me that Cora was every bit as good an artist as I’d supposed she was. About half the pictures were scenes from the desert surrounding Kaza-Blanka, rendered in a naturalistic understated way. The rest were studies of Blanka, the White City.
Had I not known otherwise, I would have assumed the two sets of paintings to be the work of two different artists. The desert scenes possessed a desolate beauty that evoked a sense of loss and loneliness, like I was the sole survivor of some awful apocalypse. They tended towards minimalism with just enough detail to render the scene and no more. It wasn’t so much what was in the pictures that made them effective as what was left out.
I could see the silence.
Looking at the studies of Blanka was like looking at the world through a fractured crystal. They were a riot of straight lines, none of them vertical or horizontal. The buildings leaned towards the viewer. Perspective was mocked. Every surface clashed with every other surface, like randomly selected notes struck all at once on an out of tune piano.
The White City, Cora seemed to be saying, should not be. All it serves to do is mock us with our mortality and the limits of our perceptions.
It was brutal, uncompromising art and it was mildly terrifying.
So this was Cora Maxwell, or two facets of her. The desert scenes were all about silence and longing and loneliness.
Once, many years ago, I had spent time camping in the desert on my own. So I knew the uniqueness of its silence. If I could paint, I would paint the desert the same way as Cora.
As to the Blanka pictures: I found myself doing what I did with the city they depicted. I pushed them out of my mind.

Back in my office, I tried ringing Cora but got no reply. Too bad. I wanted her to know I’d been to her exhibition and was thoroughly impressed. I also wanted to make sure she knew I was keen to see her again.
Barely two seconds after I’d put the phone down, it rang. Foolishly assuming Cora would be on the other end of the line, I snatched up the hand set.
‘Norton.’
‘Yeah, Wyman here.’ The pathologist sounded distracted, as if he was reading while talking. ‘You’d better come and get your path report – assuming you still want it.’
‘Send it up to me, will you?’
‘Bollocks to that, you lazy-arsed twerp. If you want this report, you can jolly well come and get it.’
I was halfway through what would have been the first of many expletives when Wyman cut the connection.

When I entered the morgue, I felt for a moment like I was back at the Kaza ICA. One of the rooms at the gallery, having been made to resemble an operating theatre, had been afflicted with the same white tiles and the same bland lighting that made everything it fell upon look like it wasn’t entirely there.
Gert Wyman wore a rubber apron. He stood beside a table laden with grim-looking instruments designed to probe and render human flesh. The tools of his trade.
The wall behind him was adorned with a 5x4 array of metal doors, any of which may have been hiding a corpse.
He held up a buff folder. ‘All you ever wanted to know about the late Citizen Anton Delgado,’ he joked, ‘but were too afraid to ask.’
‘Any surprises?’ I took the folder and tucked it under my arm.
‘Only one, Inspector. Come and take a shufti at this.’
Wyman waddled over to his workbench where he had his microscope set up. The only other thing on the bench was the poker found beside Delgado’s body. It had been cleaned up and wrapped in clear plastic.
‘You recognise this, of course. Your putative murder weapon.’
‘Putative?’
‘You missed all the fun last night. Me and the lab boys spent a happy few hours ramming this puppy into the skulls of freshly slaughtered pigs. Try as we might, we could not replicate Citizen Delgado’s fatal wound.’
‘And yet the poker was found right next to Delgado with bits of his brains on it.’
‘Looks to me like Delgado was shot at close range with a crossbow or something similar. Our murderer removed the bolt then inserted the poker into the wound, wriggled it about and left it on the floor for us to find.’
‘So you’re saying the murderer went out of his way to mislead us as to the nature of the murder weapon?’
‘That about sums it up?’
‘Why would he do that?’
‘If I had to guess, I’d say it was because he’s mad.’
10. Recreation

Cora wasn’t home. I’d tried several times to phone her from work but with no luck. So now here I was at her front door, ringing her bell and calling through the letter box.
‘Can I help?’ Cora’s next door neighbour had come out to see what the fuss was all about. She was a portly woman with the sort of rosy face you associate with jam and apple pies. ‘If you’re looking for Citizen Maxwell, she’s not in.’
‘Any idea where she might be?’
‘I saw her drive off this morning with her easel and paints. She’s probably gone off to the desert to do some more of those damnable landscapes of hers. In which case she’ll be gone for days if not weeks.’
‘Damnable?’
‘Have you not seen them? The emptiness? The despair? Oh, don’t get me wrong. Cora’s a great artist – possibly the best Kaza’s ever produced, but she does herself no favours by making her work so challenging. Me – I’m only half the artist she is, yet I sell ten times as much work at ten times the price. Why? Because I give the public what the public wants. It’s a trick Cora’s yet to learn.’
‘She’s got her own room at the Kaza ICA.’
‘For one week only.’
I took out my notepad, scribbled down my phone number and the words call me, tore out the sheet and popped it through the letter box. As I headed towards my car, Cora’s neighbour called after me.
‘You’re a policeman, aren’t you? Cora’s not in any trouble, is she?’
‘No,’ I said, fishing in my pocket for my keys. ‘I’m a friend.’
‘Have you ever thought about life modelling?’
‘Life what?’
‘Posing for pictures. You have an interesting face, Constable. You’d make a great model.’
‘Constable? I’m a Detective bloody Inspector.’
‘Sorry. No offence.’
Plenty taken. I spotted my keys sitting in the car’s ignition. ‘And what exactly is so interesting about my face?’
‘It looks lived in, Inspector.’
‘Thanks a bundle.’ I climbed into the car and thought about arresting the woman. Unfortunately, there’s no law against being bloody annoying – at least not when you’re standing in your own driveway.
I started the car and pulled away. As I headed down the road, I heard a shrill voice: ‘I’d like to paint you naked, Constable! Call me if you’re interested.’

An hour later, I was sitting in the Tabula Rasa, a jazz club on the Strip, nursing a whisky and wondering how I was going to get through the night. In my head, I was conversing with an imaginary Cora Maxwell, telling her about my life and my record collection while she gazed at me adoringly.
A cigarette girl came by my table. She had a nice smile so I bought a packet of Kaza Blue Tips. There’s something strangely satisfying about opening a fresh packet of fags and peeling off the gold foil to reveal twenty sticks of forthcoming pleasure. After picturing myself offering one to Cora, I teased a cigarette out of the box and placed it between my lips.
Seeing me looking for a light, the cigarette girl hurried to my rescue with a book of matches. I gave her a tip and a wink and she told me I was welcome.
As I drew tar and other noxious chemicals into my lungs, the world suddenly seemed a better place. ‘Oh fuck,’ I muttered. ‘That feels good.’
I grabbed a passing waiter and asked him to bring me a large whisky. ‘As you can no doubt tell,’ I told him, ‘I’m a cop, so make sure it’s the good shit or I’ll have this place raided.’
‘It’s all the good shit,’ said the waiter, feigning controlled outrage. ‘We don’t water down our drinks – ever!’
I distinctly heard him mutter arsehole as he headed for the bar. A minute later, he was back with a smarmy grin and a half bottle of whisky. ‘On the house, sir. We appreciate all the good work done by the brave men and women of the Kaza Police Department.’
‘That’s nice to hear.’ I slipped a 10 assignat note into the waiter’s hand. ‘It sure makes me feel all warm and glowy.’
Chummy’s grin changed from smarmy to something bordering on sincere. ‘I hope you enjoy your evening, sir.’
As it happens, I enjoyed it very much. The music was good, the whisky was bearable and the cigarettes were the icing on the cake.

It was just after two o’clock when I decided I was in danger of having too much of a good thing. I slipped the whisky bottle into my pocket – it was still good for a couple of slugs – and left a tip on the table.
On my way out, I bought another packet of cigarettes from the cigarette girl just so I could see her smile again.
It was a fair old walk back to my hovel, but there’s some truth in the saying that whisky gives you wings, and it seemed like my journey took barely any time at all. Along the way, I smoked another cigarette and finished off my on-the-house booze.
As I let myself into the apartment, the phone began to ring. It looked like my night wasn’t yet over.
‘Bollocks.’ I kicked off my shoes. ‘Ring all you like, matey. I’m off to bed.’
 A phone call at that time of night could only mean Son of Jack had struck again. So bloody what? There was nothing I could do about it that couldn’t wait until I’d had a good night’s sleep.
I stalked into the kitchen, intent on pulling the phone from its socket. The cord was in my hand and ready to be given a good yank when I remembered the note I’d left Cora. Although I was near certain it was a mistake, I picked up the hand set. ‘Norton.’
‘So you’ve made it home, Inspector Arsehole.’ It was Cora. She sounded drunk. Sweet but drunk. ‘Here’s a tip for you. When you leave a beautiful woman a note telling her to ring you, you stay by your phone until she does.’
‘That’s very sound advice. I shall remember it.’
‘So here I am. You bade me ring you and ring you I have.’
‘I just wanted to make sure you were OK.’
‘Really? Is that all? And here I was hoping you were intent on ravishing my sweet tender body again.’
‘Well, that also.’
‘How soon can you get here?’
‘To be honest, I’ve had quite a skinful tonight. I’ve just about enough strength to make it to the bedroom. I really am very tired.’
‘I have some pills that can take care of that. As it says on the bottle, they won’t let you down – if you take my meaning. I’ve left the front door on the latch so you can come in without me having to get out of bed wearing nothing but this skimpy night dress.’
‘Hang up,’ I told her. ‘I need to call a taxi.’

11. Investigation

How is it possible to wake up feeling so bad and yet so good?
The indulgences that had been a source of joy the night before – the booze, the fags, the pills, the sex – were now causing me no end of grief. My head and body ached. My heart was working a little too hard for comfort. My eyes stung. My stomach was awash with acid.
And yet I felt so bloody good.
Cora was already up but her essence remained. I rolled onto her side of the bed and breathed deeply of her perfume. She couldn’t have been out of bed for long because her pillow was still warm.
Slices of daylight fell through half-open blinds, which meant I was late for work. The thought was a pleasant one. Perhaps I wouldn’t show my face at all today. Perhaps I’d let Sergeant Studebaker run the show for a while and see what kind of a fist he made of it. Like all my subordinates, he felt he could do my job better than me. It would do him good to learn otherwise.
I would have stayed in bed a lot longer if the morning calm hadn’t been shattered by an abrupt eruption of noise. The whine of an electric motor supplied a discordant undertone to the din of metal attacking stone like a demented woodpecker. Although the racket came from next door, it felt like it was inside my head. 
Coffee was what I needed. Lots of it and very soon.
I got out bed, threw on my clothes and sloped off to the kitchen. The smell of freshly perked coffee and the sight of Cora at the table nibbling on toast did wonders for my mood.
Cora smiled up at me. ‘I had a bet with myself that you’d sleep through whatever Bibi could throw at you. Seems I was wrong.’
‘Bibi? Is that your neighbour? What the hell is she doing using a jackhammer at this time of morning?’
‘She’s a sculptress. You must have seen her work scattered around the city.’
‘Bibi Montague? Is that who she is?’ Just about every civic building and public park in Kaza was blessed with one or more of her abstract sculptures. Impressed, I poured myself a cup of black coffee and held it to my face so I could breathe in its aroma. ‘I bumped into her yesterday. She wants to paint me naked.’
‘Make sure she pays you big bucks. She can afford it.’
I took a sip of the coffee, bracing myself for a shudder that never arrived. Unlike the crap I was used to, Cora’s coffee was smooth and had just enough bitterness to make it satisfying. I wanted to know where I could get some for myself, but before I could frame the question, the toilet flushed in the bathroom.
I looked questioningly at Cora and she gave me a wait-and-see look.
So I waited while whoever was in the bathroom unlocked the door. Sergeant Studebaker wiped his hands on his trousers as he strolled into the kitchen.
‘Oh hi, Inspector. I see you’re up then. We’d better get going.’
I looked even more questioningly at Cora.
‘The sergeant arrived just before you showed your face,’ she explained. ‘You’re wanted on police business.’
‘Yeah,’ Studebaker confirmed. ‘We didn’t want you to miss all the fun.’
‘How did you know I would be here?
‘Wasn’t hard to figure. Yesterday, you came to work all chirpy so I knew there was a new woman in your life.’
‘Chirpy?’ I was outraged at the suggestion.
‘Maybe that’s too strong a word. I should have said you were slightly less of an arsehole than usual. And I could smell a faint aroma of perfume on you. Plus that mark on your neck was a bit of a giveaway.’
‘You couldn’t have seen that. I had my top button done up.’
‘That’s what gave it away. You never do your top button up.’ Studebaker grinned. ‘How am I doing, Inspector? You still think I’ll never make a detective?’
‘You want to tell me how you knew the lady in question was Citizen Maxwell?’
‘Well now let me see. Maybe it was something to do with you interviewing her in your office instead of the fish tank. Or maybe it was the way you looked at her, which was kind of the way my dog looks at me when I bring it a bone. Don’t worry though. Your secret is safe with me and all the other guys and girls at work – and their friends and families.’
Cora burst out laughing. ‘Isn’t this where you’re supposed to say it’s a fair cop or something?’
‘No,’ I said, feeling myself blush. ‘This is where I insist upon the right to remain silent.’

Sergeant Studebaker waited until we were in his car and safely beyond ear shot of Cora before telling me what had necessitated him hunting me down.
‘There’s been another one,’ he said plainly. ‘And this time it’s a biggy.’
‘By biggy you mean...?’
‘Hugo Levinson.’
‘Remind me.’
‘The Minister for Arts.’
I let that one sink in for a couple of seconds, then asked: ‘And we’re sure it’s the work of Son of Jack?’
Studebaker started the engine. ‘Not sure at all.’
The air conditioning kicked in. I leant forward to get cold air on my face, hoping it would clear my head. It didn’t.
As we headed down the road, I caught myself looking in the rear-view mirror somehow expecting to see Cora Maxwell standing on her doorstep, waving me goodbye. Of course she was doing no such thing.
‘You’re smiling, sir,’ Studebaker pointed out. ‘I don’t think I’ve ever seen you do that before.’
I wiped my hand across my mouth and the smile was gone. ‘You said you weren’t sure it’s the work of Son of Jack?’
‘Not me exactly. Gert Wyman is the Doubting Thomas on this one. He’s come up with some theory about how there is no Son of Jack.’
‘The man’s a moron.’
‘He may be right though. Whoever killed the minister went on to remove his heart, spleen, kidney and liver – and they made a nice clean job of it..’
‘So the killer used Jack’s m.o.? So what? It’s hardly surprising considering he was Jack’s partner in crime.’
‘Or possibly not. Wyman thinks West Side Jack is still alive and responsible for the deaths of both Elmore Brecht and Hugo Levinson.’
‘That man is so full of crap.’

Studebaker pulled up outside a red brick monstrosity. Situated beside the Kaza River, it imitated the architecture of Blanka in a way that almost mocked it. Six storeys tall and with the footprint of a football stadium, it looked like the architect had taken pictures of the buildings in Kaza, cut them up and pasted them back together in no particular order.
The result was as heavy on the mind as it was on the eye. 
‘Here we are,’ Studebaker declared. ‘Paradise Heights. I love this building.’
I wanted to thump him. ‘This is where the Minister for Arts lived? Seriously?’
‘Not lived exactly. Unbeknownst to his wife, the Right Honourable Gentleman was renting the penthouse suite as a venue for what you might call his away games.’
‘A love nest?’
‘I prefer the term shag pad, but each to his own.’
Paradise Heights had a concierge who happened to be an ex-cop operating on the triple principle of hear no evil, see no evil and speak no evil.
He was not aware the penthouse suite was rented out to the Arts Minister. He had never seen any of the residents, let alone Hugo Levinson, bring home strange women. Just what sort of people did we think resided there?
And as to who might have killed Levinson: our guess was as good as his.
He was a small man with rheumy eyes, a uniform and an attitude. His office was a windowless affair with a hatchway through which he could keep an eye on the foyer. A small bank of television monitors served as windows into other parts of the building. They mostly showed empty corridors.
‘The people of Paradise Heights,’ said the concierge, feet on table, mug of tea in one hand, half eaten sandwich in the other, ‘pay a lot of money to live here and they expect two things in return. One is luxury. The other is privacy.’
‘In other words,’ said Studebaker, ‘you wouldn’t tell us shit no matter what.’
‘You got it, Sarge. What happens in Paradise Heights stays in Paradise Heights.’
‘What about tapes? Surely those monitors are recorded?’
‘They most certainly are not.’
‘You’re very short,’ I observed, moving round the desk and looming over the concierge.
He bristled. ‘Yeah? So what of it?’
‘Is that why you left the force? Did they kick you out when they brought in the new height requirements? Did they turn round and say Sorry, no dwarves?’
‘I am not a dwarf!’
‘What are you then? A midget? A homunculus? A pixie?’ I flicked his ear.
‘You fucker!’ The concierge swung a punch which I almost dodged. It landed with little impact on my upper thigh.
Stepping back, I pulled my gun from its holster and pointed it at his face. ‘Assaulting a police officer is a serious offence, Shorty. So is resisting arrest.’
‘I’m not resisting arrest.’
‘Tell that to the judge. Assuming, of course, you don’t get shot while trying to escape.’
Shorty looked at Sergeant Studebaker and jerked a thumb in my direction. ‘Is he always such an arsehole?’
‘Not always. Or so I’ve heard.’
‘There were wankers like him when I was in the police force. They’re the ones who should have been kicked out.’
‘I couldn’t agree more.’ Studebaker drew his own gun and aimed it in my direction. ‘Put the gun away, sir. Or I’ll shoot you in the bollocks.’
‘Just whose side are you on?’
‘The guy’s an ex-cop and we don’t go round stitching up our own, do we, boss? Now put the fucking gun away or say goodbye to your love spuds.’
I slipped the gun back in its holster. ‘Have it your way, Sergeant. Just don’t go thinking I’m going to forget this.’ 
Studebaker lowered his piece. ‘You mind if I help myself to a cup of tea?’
‘Fill your boots,’ said the concierge. ‘But old prune face isn’t having any.’
‘What’s your name, by the way?’
‘My friends call me Stretch.’
The Sergeant gave me a sly wink. ‘Why don’t go look at the stiff, boss? Me and Stretch would like some privacy.’
I headed out to the foyer. As I reached the lifts, Stretch shouted through his hatchway. ‘You ever point a gun at me again, I’ll break your legs. You arsehole!’

The penthouse apartment was a dome. The bedrooms, bathrooms and a few other rooms were arranged around the circumference, leaving what you might call an inner sanctum in the middle.
Most of Hugo Levinson, still technically Minister for the Arts, lay naked on a fur rug that must have been worth a fortune before getting drenched in blood. As to the location of the rest of him – his heart, liver, kidneys and spleen – that was anybody’s guess.
‘Look familiar?’ Gert Wyman taunted as I studied the victim’s empty torso with my magnifying glass.
The murderer had cut a doorway into Levinson’s stomach, which was exactly the way the Ripper used to do things. ‘Son of Jack would have known how the Ripper worked. It’s no surprise he should operate in exactly the same way.’
‘Whoever removed those organs knew what they were doing. You don’t learn precision surgery by watching someone else do it. Admit it, Inspector: this is the work of Jack the Revelator, aka the West Side Ripper.’
‘The Ripper’s dead.’
‘Wishful thinking, Norton.’
I got up off my knees and stepped away from the corpse. ‘I’m sure it’s not escaped your attention that the deceased is male.’
‘And?’ 
‘The Ripper’s victims were all female and all lived on the West Side.’
‘Apart from that exterminator chappy and now this chap here.’
‘Both victims of Son of Jack.’
‘One hundred assignats says there is no Son of Jack.’
‘You’re on.’
Gene Hooke came out of a perimeter room, camera in hand. ‘Man, this place rocks big time. You should see the bathrooms. They’ve got gold taps and those things you wash your bollocks in. And the master bedroom! It’s got a walk-in wardrobe bigger than my flat!’
I looked around at the expensive furniture and objets d’art and felt an urge to set fire to them. I’m not usually a jealous man but it kind of pissed me off that this hadn’t even been Levinson’s actual home – just his little playhouse.
‘They tell us government ministers don’t earn as much as we think,’ I complained. ‘It looks to me like chummy here was coining it in beyond our wildest dreams.’
‘They’re all corrupt,’ Gene chipped in. ‘Ain’t a politician in the entire city who ain’t on the take.’
Wyman was at the drink’s cabinet. ‘I don’t suppose the Minister would begrudge us a drink. I take it you two will join me?’
We took our drinks out onto the roof terrace from where we had as good a view of Blanka as you were ever liable to get from Kaza. From our vantage point, the White City wasn’t so white. Fine red sand blown in from the desert formed a barely discernible film on the walls of the buildings. Elsewhere, it accumulated on the roads and pathways and in the courtyards too.
The city was deserted and oh so very quiet.
‘The Silence,’ I said, leaning against the parapet.
Gene and Wyman shot me quizzical looks. I could have told them about Cora’s paintings but decided that would be casting pearls before swine. So I said nothing more.
‘It’s like a ghost,’ Gene Hooke declared. ‘A bloody great phantom looming up before us, its nature unknowable, its meaning unclear.’
Gert Wyman rattled the ice cubes in his glass. ‘Bloody awful place. It shouldn’t even exist. We should tear it down and bury it.'
Footsteps caused me to turn my back on Blanka. Sergeant Studebaker had joined us on the roof.
‘Citizen Stretch likes the sound of his own voice,’ he said with a grin.
‘Did you get anything out of him?’
‘I sure did. ‘ Studebaker shielded his eyes against the glare of the sun and surveyed Blanka. ‘Now that’s what a city should look like. I see you guys have all got a drink. Do you mind if I grab one?’
‘Once you’ve given me your report, Sergeant.’
‘OK. Here it is in a nutshell. This building has a secret entrance for the exclusive use of the occupier of this here penthouse. It leads to a lift which comes straight to this floor and nowhere else. As far as the tenants are concerned, there ain’t no cameras in the entrance or in the lift – except there is. Tucked away in the corner of the lift is a secret camera only the building’s owners and security guards know about.
‘Anyway, this morning when Stretch clocked on, the guy on the night shift was a bit excited. Thanks to the hidden camera, he’d seen Levinson sneaking a broad up to his shag pad. Nothing unusual in that, of course, except this particular broad wasn’t the sort of trash Levinson usually brought home, and the guard recognised her. And you’ll never guess who it was.’
‘The tooth fairy?’
‘Bibi Montague, the sculptress!’
12. Deprivation

Studebaker didn’t get his drink.
13. Allegation

Bibi Montague wasn’t at home. Her latest work in progress - a block of granite the size of a family car - stood beneath an orange tree in her back garden. After careful consideration, I concluded it was most likely the figure of a reclining nude.
Studebaker begged to disagree. ‘If you look at it from over here and crouch down like this, it don’t half look like somebody’s innards.’
I crouched down, wincing as my knees cracked and a muscle in my back gave a brief spasm of pain, which I took as a warning of worse to come if I pushed my luck. ‘Still looks like a nude to me.’
‘See there?’ Studebaker pointed. ‘That’s the heart. And there’s the liver.’
‘They’re in the wrong place.’
‘Of course. It’s an abstract.’
‘I don’t know. I still can’t see it.’
‘Well, what about those?’ 
‘Buttocks?’
‘Lungs.’
‘They look like buttocks to me. And you can’t tell me those aren’t breasts.’
‘They’re kidneys, boss.’
I tilted my head and crouched down a little bit more. ‘I think I see a vagina.’
‘That’s because you’re a dirty old man.’
‘Less of the old, Sergeant.’
We straightened up and studied the sculpture some more.
‘I know what you’re thinking,’ I said. ‘You’re thinking Bibi Montague butchered innocent people so she could steal their inner bits to use as models for her sculpture.’
‘Got it in one.’
‘She’s an abstract artist. Verisimilitude is hardly her stock in trade. Besides which, there are any number of books that could show her what a human kidney looks like.’
Studebaker took out his pen knife and opened it. ‘What do you reckon, boss? Is Bibi the Ripper or not?’
‘The Ripper’s dead.’
‘So Citizen Montague is Son of the Ripper?’
‘Being seen with Levinson shortly before he was murdered doesn’t necessarily make her the murder.’
‘So you don’t want me to force the back door open with my pen knife?’
‘No. I want you to kick it open.’ Without a warrant, we could only legitimately break into the bungalow if we believed a crime was in process or someone was in imminent danger. Breaking in with a knife would have looked premeditated. Kicking down the door, however, could be construed as two brave coppers going to the aid of a damsel in distress.
Studebaker reluctantly put his knife away. ‘You have a knack for taking the fun out of things.’ With as much bad grace as he could muster, he gave the back door a hefty kick. It flew open. ‘Too easy.’
I drew my gun and led the way through to the living room. ‘Citizen Montague? Are you OK?’
The living room was devoid of furniture. In its place were chunks of stone in various stages of metamorphosis. The floor was littered with carving tools and stone chips.
‘And I thought my joint was untidy,’ Studebaker quipped. ‘I wonder what her bedroom’s like.’
‘Let’s go see.’
It was tidy and much like you’d expect a middle-aged woman’s bedroom to be. There was nothing to suggest we were in the domain of a serial killer.
The rest of the bungalow was a washout. If Bibi Montague was Son of Jack, she had done a mighty good job of hiding it.
Returning to the garden, I looked anxiously towards Cora’s bungalow for any sign of either Cora or Citizen Montague.
‘Now what?’ Studebaker asked as he put the back door back on its hinges.
‘Now we pay our respects to Citizen Maxwell and mention in a non-panic inducing way that she might be living next door to a homicidal maniac. Then we put out an APB for Bibi Montague.’
Cora didn’t answer her door. A quick peep through a few windows convinced me she wasn’t at home. Studebaker, however, had his doubts.
‘We couldn’t see all the way into the bedroom because of the blinds,’ he pointed out. ‘And the bathroom window’s frosted.’
‘The air con’s off,’ I countered. ‘If she was in, it would be on.’
‘Not if she was dead.’ Studebaker produced his pen knife again. ‘I’m assuming she hasn’t given you your own key as yet.’
‘Put that thing away. If she was in, I’d know.’
‘So now you’re psychic?’
I gave Studebaker a look that told him he’d better back off. Thankfully he had enough brains to get the message and put away his knife.
‘Yeah, OK. I can dig it,’ he said as we headed back to the car. ‘If I had a broad like that, I wouldn’t want to risk finding her dead neither.’

14. Sedation

The Blue Dragon is the sort of joint you don’t know exists unless somebody wants you to. Halfway down the Strip, there’s a shop that sells records and books. The room at the back is for scoring whack magazines, bundles of photographs you wouldn’t want your mother to see and books with titles like Secretary in Chains, Biker Gangbang and Matron’s Dirty Secret.
A grubby curtain hangs in a doorway. Beyond the curtain is a short corridor that leads to a store room. If you know where to knock and the exact pattern of knocks to use, a hidden door opens. Through the door, down stone stairs, along a passageway and there you are.
I have no idea how large the Blue Dragon is. It’s housed in part of the Catacombs, that mysterious labyrinth of vaulted tunnels running beneath the city. Like many things in Kaza-Blanka, the history of the Catacombs remains unknown. Rumour has it they had once been full of human remains and funerary treasure, all of which was now secreted in a secure government warehouse. If that was the case, the alcove in which Cora and I made ourselves comfortable had to have been a resting place of a more permanent nature.
Our mattress was stained and the bed clothes were ragged, but we hadn’t come for the decor.
A girl in a blue kimono brought us our first pipe. In common with all employees of the Blue Dragon, her face was hidden behind a dragon mask, a consequence of the joint not having a narcotics licence.
The pipe was lit and handed to Cora, and then the curtain was drawn. We’d brought along a bottle of Kaza No. 1 to keep us amused until the opium kicked in. The smell of the opium was exquisite, like perfumed marijuana. Cora said it smelt like the wings of burning angels and I wasn’t about to argue.
As she drew on the pipe, I noted the glyphs etched into the long stem, which was made of bone or ivory. They were supposedly characters from some forgotten alphabet but I had my doubts. To me they seemed like random yet aesthetically pleasing marks, and I figured they were probably cracks in the bone highlighted with ink.
Cora’s face glowed with pleasure. ‘I love opium,’ she whispered. ‘It truly is the stuff of dreams.’ After handing me the pipe, she cracked open the whisky and took a sip. Then she lay on her side, propped up on her elbow, watching me smoke. ‘So Bibi’s a killer? I find that hard to believe. She’s always kind to animals.’
‘I didn’t say she was a killer.’ I drew some magic fumes into my lungs and felt the first faint stirrings of euphoria. ‘Just that we need to talk to her.’
‘You know what I think? I think she’s gone to Blanka. I think she’ll come wondering back over the Bridge of Sighs with the mind of a new born baby.’ Cora took the pipe from me and handed me the whisky. ‘It wouldn’t be the first time she’s crossed over, you know.’
‘I wasn’t aware of that.’
‘She’s schizophrenic. Going to Blanka seemed like a good way to get rid of the voices.’
‘A bit drastic.’
‘But it worked. At least for a while.’
We finished the pipe, made love, then ordered another.
As we started on our fifth pipe, we talked more about Bibi Montague and the voices in her head.
‘They drove her to seek the Silence,’ said Cora. ‘I remember how she was whenever they got too much for her. When she looked at me, it was like there were a thousand people staring out through her eyes, all of them wanting to speak at once.’ Cora rested her head on my chest. Her breath teased my skin. ‘Having your mind wiped must be like turning off the music. Only in Bibi’s case, there was too much music. It must have been like being surrounded by dozens of radio sets all tuned to a different station.
‘Imagine you had a piece of music – a symphony, let’s say – and you took away the notes so only the spaces between them remained. Then you’d have silence, but not ordinary silence. This would be the Silence – with a capital S.’
‘How would it differ from any other silence?’
‘It would remember the music.’
Thanks to the opium, I was in an unusually philosophical mood, so I asked, ‘What if you did it the other way round? What if you kept the notes and got rid of the Silence?’
Cora laughed. ‘You can’t get rid of the Silence. That’s why we have music: so we can pretend the Silence isn’t there.’
We finished off the whisky and smoked a few more pipes of opium.
As I began to slip into enchanted sleep, I heard Cora whisper. ‘You’ve been in the desert at night, Seth, and you know how many stars you can see away from the lights of the city. Remove  the stars, and you’re left with darkness. Only it’s darkness with a memory of stars and therefore another manifestation of the Silence.
‘It’s almost the same with death, but not quite. Death is Silence without memory. That’s why it scares us so.’
15. Revelation

As the opium dreams faded and my mind tuned into reality once more, there was noise all around me. But amidst that noise, like the space between the notes, there was silence.
Cora was gone.
I checked my watch. It was 7:85, which meant I was already late for work. Cora had mentioned she wouldn’t hang around if she woke up before me. Which was entirely sensible. Once the opium’s worn off, an opium den’s no place to be.
I felt good. Unlike other drugs, opium is a kind mistress so long as you don’t abuse her. As I stepped out into the light of day, the city seemed unusually vibrant. The Strip was awash with colours. The traffic sounded musical.
I found a phone box and called the Precinct House to let them know I was on my way. Sergeant Studebaker answered.
‘We found Bibi Montague,’ he said. ‘She was standing by the Bridge of Sighs. You can guess the rest.’
‘Is she in custody?’
‘She’s been committed to Kaza Asylum.’
‘And her mind’s completely wiped?’
‘Completely.’
‘You’re sure she’s not faking it?’
‘The rule book says someone has to question her, so I went along to the nut house to do just that. For half an hour, I sat at her bedside and watched her drool, dribble and defecate. I even went so far as to pretend to punch her in the face; she didn’t so much as blink.
‘Trust me on this one, boss. Bibi Montague’s mind has taken a long vacation.’

My mouth was dry, my stomach periodically reminded me it was empty, and I stank of booze, opium and a night at the Blue Dragon. My mind, however, was in good working order.
As soon as I got to the Precinct House, I hauled Studebaker into the Incident Room.
‘What are we missing, Sergeant?’ I dropped into a chair and put my feet up on a desk. ‘Let’s take it as read that Bibi Montague was Jack the Revelator. We know she was prone to hearing voices, so maybe they told her to kill. And perhaps you were right when you surmised she was ripping out her victims’ innards to help her in her work.
‘So she prowls around the West Side, picking up loose women from the streets and various gin joints. No one suspects for one moment she might be the Ripper because everyone assumes the Ripper is a man.
‘So far, so good. It all makes sense to me until we get to our friend Citizen Anton Delgado, victim number seven. Why did she kill him? He doesn’t fit the profile of her earlier victims.’
‘Perhaps she fancied a change,’ Sergeant Studebaker suggested.
‘No. I don’t think that’s it. Psycho killers tend to be creatures of habit. Their first kill thrills them so much, they have to keep repeating it. The only thing that varies is the intensity of what they do. Each murder tends to be nastier than the last.
‘Bibi Montague killed six women for pleasure or possibly art, but that’s not why she killed Delgado. I think that was done out of necessity. Maybe he knew too much.’
Studebaker perched himself on the edge of a desk. ‘I don’t think we should trouble ourselves with why Montague snuffed Delgado. The chances are we’ll never know, because the one person who could have told us has gone and had her mind wiped.’
‘You’re right, Sergeant. But we’re dancing around the elephant in the room. There’s one obvious question neither of us have bothered to ask.’
‘What are the odds against a prostitute picking up a punter on the very night her neighbour murders him?’ Studebaker looked pleased with himself. ‘Everyone on the team has asked that question, boss. We’ve been wondering when you’d get round to it.’
‘That’s not the question I had in mind.’
‘You surprise me.’
‘My question is how did a middle-aged woman of average build manage to ram a poker through a man’s skull? You’re the sort of person who chews bricks for breakfast, and I bet even you couldn’t do that.’
‘Actually, it’s cornflakes all the way. Not much fibre in bricks.’
‘Round up a couple of plods and send them to the evidence room. I want everything that wastaken from Citizen Delgado’s so-called study brought here and laid out neatly on the floor.’
‘For fuck’s sake, boss. You gotta be kidding me. The Chief will go ape shit when he finds out.’
‘Then we’d better move quickly, hadn’t we?’
Studebaker puffed out his cheeks and shook his head. ‘You know what?’ he said. ‘You’re looking at the wrong fucking elephant.’

I was fading fast. My night at the Blue Dragon was taking its toll. I needed sleep.
Elephant, elephant, elephant. The word played on a continuous loop in my head. Where was the damned thing?
The items taken from Citizen Delgado’s study were laid out in plastic bags on the floor according to where they had been found. The contents of the bookcase were grouped together in several lines, each line being the equivalent of one of the shelves. Everything found on the desk was arranged in a rectangle. And so on.
My innards were awash with coffee. I’d popped a couple of tabs of speed but they weren’t having much effect. It was all I could do to keep from sending Studebaker off to fetch me some Quaaludes.
‘Do you see a pattern, Sergeant?’
‘All I see is a shit load of evidence that’s likely to get contaminated.’
‘There has to be ... something!’
Studebaker looked at his watch. ‘It’s nearly lunch time. What say you we get outta here and score some pizza? My treat.’
‘This is like sheet music. Each bag of evidence is a note of some avant garde jazz piece. You know? The stuff that sounds random but isn’t? You ever hear Principia by Juice Harris? Its chord progressions are based on pi – 3.14159265359. At first, it sounds like crap, but once you tune into what’s going on and pick up the patterns, it both thrills and enthralls.’
‘Sir, with all due respect, you appear to be talking nonsense.’
‘The thing is – the thing we have to do is ignore the notes and concentrate on the space between them.’
‘That’s it. I’m off to lunch.’
‘No, wait! That bag there. The one from the top shelf with the piece of brass in it. You see it? What does it look like to you?’
‘I dunno. A piece of brass, I guess.’
‘And that one there?’ I pointed to a third shelf item. It was a mirror image of the first. ‘And how about this ... ? And this ... ? And this ... ?’
To Studebaker’s dismay, I collected up the bags in question and emptied them onto the desk.
‘You can’t do that!’ Studebaker squawked. ‘You’re contaminating the evidence.’
‘It’s only evidence because I had it bagged up. Any other case officer would have left it where it was, but I knew ... I just knew ... .’
‘Knew what, boss?’
‘I don’t know. Let’s find out.’ I shuffled the pieces about and then slotted them all together. The result was a small crossbow.
Studebaker was impressed. ‘Bibi Montague was one clever bitch. She hid the murder weapon right under our noses. But there ain’t no way she fired a poker with that thing.’
‘She must have used a normal crossbow bolt and removed it from the victim. Then she shoved the poker into the wound.’
‘But why leave the crossbow behind? We were bound to find it eventually.’
‘And a fat lot of good it’s done us.’ I held up the crossbow and admired the craftsmanship that had gone into its creation. There being no weapons factories in Kaza, it seemed likely that Delgado had machined the means of his own destruction. ‘Citizen Montague wanted us to find this. It’s all part of her game – just like her Dear Pen Pal letters to me.’

Cora didn’t answer her phone. When I went to her bungalow, there was no sign of her. Not exactly surprising considering her neighbour’s house was cordoned off and swarming with police.
I drove my Kaza Sedan-7 home and parked up outside my apartment building. The place looked grubbier, gloomier and more soul-destroying than ever. It didn’t help that a couple of my neighbours were screaming insults at one another or that some joker on the second floor was murdering a song about love tearing him and his sweetheart apart. His weapons were a piano he could barely play and a voice that needed putting out of its misery.
At the top of the basement stairs, I switched on the basement light. It was the cue for a carpet of cockroaches to scarper in all directions and disappear back into the nooks and crannies from which they had come.
Having seen the sight a thousand times, I had almost become inured to it. But my couple of nights in Cora Maxwell’s delightful bungalow had opened my eyes somewhat.
It was way too soon for me to suggest moving in with her, but it was definitely on my list of things to do. Of course, Cora might have other ideas, in which case I was quite prepared to take myself down to the Department of Housing and threaten a few people with trumped-up charges unless I got rehoused in something more befitting a detective inspector.
As I entered my apartment, I couldn’t help but notice how much it smelt of me in contrast to the way Cora’s place smelt of Cora.
A glass of tap water took care of my dry mouth, although I knew it would be only temporary. Coffee was next on the agenda.
I couldn’t be bothered to fuss about with the percolator, so I made do with Kaza Instant. Needless to say, it was rank. I drank as much as I could stand then poured the rest into the sink.
So what next? Shower then food then bed? Or food then shower then bed?
A quick sniff of my armpits made it an easy decision.
Twenty minutes later, I was as fresh as the proverbial, shaved, smelling of talcum powder and sporting clean underwear and a shirt that was almost creaseless.
Nothing had happened in the past few days to mitigate the washing up situation. All my cooking and eating utensils remained in the sink, and that’s where they were going to stay for now. It wasn’t as if there was a shortage of fast food joints in the neighbourhood.
The telephone rang, which put me in a quandary. Not so long ago I’d have put money on the caller being the Chief. But with Cora now in the equation all bets were off.
Should I answer it? Or should I not?
I answered it. ‘Norton.’
‘Hey, boss! You made it home then?’ It was Studebaker. ‘Listen; you mind if I come over? Only there’s something I need to show ya.’
‘I’m just about to go grab a burger somewhere. Care to join me?’
‘Forget about the burger, boss. Sit tight and I’ll be there in a jiffy.’
Ten minutes later, I was letting Studebaker into the apartment.
‘You must have broken every traffic law in the book,’ I observed. ‘My fastest time from the Precinct House is twenty minutes.’
‘No disrespect, boss,’ said Studebaker, ‘but you drive like an old woman.’
I pointed at the briefcase he was carrying. ‘I’m guessing that contains whatever’s so hell-fire important it can’t wait till I’m back on shift.’
‘Let’s go through to the kitchen. And you’d better fix yourself a whisky. You’re gonna need it.’
In the kitchen, I fixed myself a whisky and joined Studebaker at the table. As he undid the clasps on his briefcase, the floor trembled.
‘Wait a second.’ I placed my glass in the centre of the table. ‘Watch this.’
I studied the effect on the whisky as the train passed beneath my feet. Unlike the time it had been on the sideboard, the whisky reacted in a random, chaotic fashion, sloshing this way and that and forming nothing resembling a pattern.
Someday I planned to put glasses of whisky all round the apartment and diligently note how they behaved when a subway train came rumbling by. My working hypothesis was that the further the whisky was from the epicentre, the less chaotic would be its behaviour.
The train passed. The whisky settled down. I took a couple of mouthfuls.
‘Do you want to know something interesting?’ I asked Studebaker. ‘Something incredibly strange?’
‘We gotta get on, boss. This is important.’
But I had an unstoppable urge to share what had been playing on my mind ever since I’d moved into the apartment. ‘About three or four times a day, a train passes beneath my floor.’
‘So your pad is built over the Metro system? Nothing strange about that.’
‘Except this is the East Side. The Metro doesn’t come this way.’
‘You sure?’
‘I’ve checked with the Department of Transport. The nearest rail line is in Outer Central, half a kilometre away, and it’s elevated.’
‘Whatever.’ Studebaker rummaged through his briefcase. ‘I’ve been going through the stuff we found in Citizen Delgado’s flat and found this.’ He pulled out a ring binder and handed it to me. ‘Read it and weep.’
It was a set of schematics. I flicked through the pages, each of which contained one or more circuit diagrams. The last page folded out to reveal a picture of a fully-assembled electro-clavier.
‘I remember seeing the finished product in Citizen Maxwell’s bungalow,’ Studebaker announced as I handed the folder back to him. ‘When I asked her about it, she said she’d designed and built it herself. But it turns out that honour actually goes to Citizen Delgado. The two of them weren’t such strangers after all.’
I finished off my whisky and thought about ramming the glass into Studebaker’s face. Luckily for at least one of us, I decided to refill it instead.
‘So Cora told a little fib?’ I forced myself to sound civil. ‘So what?’
‘Except it wasn’t just the one fib. Last night, while you were zonked out in La-La Land, I checked with the pimps and prozzies on the Rue Dante and ain’t none of them ever seen Citizen Maxwell hawking her wares. Which leads to an obvious question. Why would a respectable woman claim to be a prostitute when she’s not?’ Studebaker reached into his pocket and produced an envelope. ‘This came for you at the Precinct House. I took the liberty of steaming it open. You need to read it.’
I snatched the envelope from Studebaker and re-opened it. Inside was a handwritten letter.
 Dear Pen Pal, it began. All good things must come to an end and this is very likely the last time I will write to you. For me it’s been a great deal of fun playing our little game, and I’m sure you’ve enjoyed it as much as I have. But now it’s time for us both to move on.
Of course, if you’d told me the name of the security guard who’d seen me in the lift with Hugo, then things would be different. I’d have killed him before he realised he had his artists muddled up, you’d have gone on thinking Bibi was the killer, and our game would have carried on a bit longer.
By the time you read this, I’ll be airside and beyond your reach. As this is goodbye, I suppose I owe it to you to explain why I killed those people. Firstly, it had nothing to do with their internal organs. I removed those purely as a way of distinguishing myself from the other serial killers that have graced – or will grace – the streets of Kaza-Blanka. Like all artists, I need people to be able to identify my work as my work. By divesting my victims of their hearts, lungs, liver, kidneys and wombs, I was signing my name in a cryptic but unmistakable manner.
So why, Inspector? That’s the question, isn’t it? Why did I kill all those people?
When I die, I want their vengeful souls to be waiting for me. With them for company, I need never hear the space between the notes. The Silence shall not have me.
Yours sincerely.
Jack the Revelator. 
16. Destination

The sun was setting as Studebaker drove me to the airport. He wanted to hit the accelerator but I told him not to.
‘There’s no point. She’s already airside.’
‘Then there’s nothing you can do. Not unless you go airside yourself and you wouldn’t be that dumb, would you, boss? I mean, now you know she’s a psychic bitch queen from Hell, you ain’t still in love with her. Are you?’
‘Just get me to the airport, Sergeant. I’ll figure out what to do when I get there along the way.’
We pulled onto the Strip and found ourselves in a traffic jam. The air was ripe with exhaust fumes and profanities.
‘Do you want me to use the siren?’ Studebaker asked.
‘Let’s sit it out. Right now, we have all the time in the world.’
I produced my packet of Kaza Blue Tips and offered one to Studebaker. He took it.
‘Why not? I’ve kinda given up but I couldn’t let you smoke alone. Your head must be in some weird place right now.’
We lit up, smoked a bit. Edged forward a couple of metres.
‘I gotta say,’ said Studebaker, ‘for a man who’s just discovered he’s been porking a cold-blooded serial killer, you’re holding together pretty well.’
‘It’s the opium. My head’s still buzzing.’ And just as well too. It kept me one step from reality and its accompanying heartache. ‘I still haven’t got it all figured out.’
‘She played you nicely, boss.’
‘Anton Delgado was an innocent party. Right?’
‘Citizen Maxwell killed him to make you think he was Jack the Revelator and she was his next intended victim. That way she hoped to stop the investigation dead in its tracks. But then Citizen Brecht started bragging about how he’d seen her naked, so she shut him up.’
As it so often does in Kaza, the traffic mysteriously unjammed itself and began flowing again. We arrived at the airport just as I was stubbing out my cigarette.
Studebaker pulled up outside the Departures Terminal. 
‘Tell me you ain’t planning to do what I think you’re planning to do,’ he pleaded.
‘You’d best head back to the Precinct House and write up what you know. From this point on, you’re in charge of the Ripper investigation.’
‘Think, boss. I’m begging you. If you follow her to Elsewhere, then what? You’ve no jurisdiction there and she can’t be extradited.’
‘It’s my duty to warn the authorities in Elsewhere that they have a killer on their hands.’
‘Hogwash. This ain’t nothing to do with duty and you know it.’ As I reached for the door handle, Studebaker pulled his gun on me. ‘I can’t let you do this, boss.’
I pushed open the door. ‘The only way you can stop me is to shoot me.’
‘She was right, you know. You are an arsehole.’ Studebaker lowered his piece. ‘’What do you want me to tell the Chief?’
‘Tell him I quit and he can go fuck himself. Do you think you can manage that?’
‘I’ll tell him you’ll be back soon – with or without Cora Maxwell.’
Studebaker drove off the second I got out of the car. Night had fallen and the airport looked deserted.
I lit up a Kaza Blue Tip and gazed through the perimeter fence at the desert and its big, black sky with its dusting of stars. While Little Moon sailed high in the firmament close to the constellation of Cerberus, Big Moon remained half-hidden by the Kaza Mountains.
I wondered if the sky looked different in Elsewhere.
